STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES (SOP) for INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) Version: 01; June, 2014Dr. S. N. Sushil Plant Protection Advisor Dte. of PPQ&S, Faridabad June 5, 2014 Ram Asre Addl. PPA (IPM) Dte. of PPQ& S, Faridabad List of Contributors Technical guidance and Supervision: Dr. S. N. Sushil, Plant Protection Adviser & Ram Asre, Addl. Plant Protection Adviser (IPM) Sl. No. Chapter Contributors 1. Standardization of FFS Curriculum, HRD; Orientation Training (2 days), Refresher Training (5 days) and SLTP (long duration) (1) Dr. V.K. Srivastava , JD (PP) , HQ, Faridabad; Group Leader (2) Dr. Jasveer Singh , DD (E) , HQ, Faridabad (3) Sh. R. Murali , DD (E), HQ, Faridabad (4) Dr. G.P. Singh , AD (E) , CIPMC, Gorakhpur (5) Sh. Yogesh Kunwar, PPO (WS) , HQ, Faridabad 2. Conservation & Augmentation of Bio- control agents (1) Sh. Ram Asre , APPA (IPM) , HQ, Faridabad (2) Dr. C. S. Patni , PPO (PP) , CIPMC, Faridabad 3. Pests Surveillance & Monitoring (1) Dr. K.S. Kapoor , DD (E) ; Co-ordinator , HQ, Faridabad (2) Sh. P.K. Ghosh , AD (E) , CIPMC, Kolkata 4. Weed ecology and Management (1) Dr. Shbhas Kumar , DD (WS) , HQ, Faridabad (2) Sh. Arunabha Chakrabort y, PPO (E) , HQ, Faridabad (3) Sh. Yogesh Kunwar , PPO (WS) , HQ, Faridabad 5. Laboratory Manual for Mass Rearing of Bio- control agents (1) Dr. M. S. Akhtar , AD (E), CIPMC, Faridabad Member Secretary (2) Dr. Umesh Kumar , PPO (PP) , CIPMC, Lucknow (3) Dr. Navendu Nair , PPO (E) , CIPMC, Agartala 6. Compiled by (1) Dr. M. S. Akhtar , AD (E), CIPMC, Faridabad Member Secretary 7. Design & Layout (1) Sh. Arunabha Chakrabort y, PPO (E) , HQ, Faridabad Contents Foreword Preface List of Contributors Sl. No. CHAPTER PAGE NO. 1. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT i. Standardization of FFS Curriculum ii. Orientation Training Programme iii. Season Long Training Programme 1-41 01 08 09 2. CONSERVATION & AUGMENTATION OF BIO -CONTROL AGENTS i. Introduction ii. Programmes to be implemented iii. Tools for conservation & augmentation of bio -control agents iv. Items required for conservation & augmentation kit v. Some pests and their common natural Enemies vi. Ways and Means of Conservation of Natural Enemies vii. Conserve & Augment following Bio -agents viii. List of Bio -control agents of different crops ix. Natural enemies of crop pests in India x. Ecological Engineering xi. Recognize natural enemies xii. Cultural practices that affect natural enemies xiii. Identify the natural enemies xiv. Augmentation of Natural enemies xv. Recomm ended dose of bio -control agents xvi. Biological agents used against different crop insect pests 42-68 42 42 42 42 43 44 45 46 57 48 50 52 52 60 61 64 3. PESTS SURVEILLANCE & MONITORING i. Surveillance ii. Agencies to be involved for surveillance iii. Aims & objectives of surveillance iv. Why to conduct pest surveillance v. Outcome of the surveillance action vi. Types of survey vii. Electronic -pest surveillance through hand held device viii. Pest surveillance and advisory system in india ix. Sampling 69-83 69 69 69 70 70 71 71 72 72 x. Items required for survey & surveillance in the kit xi. Sampling methods xii. Disease assessment xiii. Sampling for nematodes xiv. Rodents survey xv. Estimation of weeds xvi. Identification of diseases, pests, weeds, natural enemies in different crops 73 74 75 76 75 77 4. WEED ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT i. Introduction ii. Classification of Weeds iii. Weed Ecology iv. Survival Mechanisms of Weeds v. Weed competition vi. Principles of Weed Management vii. Integrated Weed Management (IWM) 84-97 84 84 90 91 92 93 93 5. LABORATORY MANUAL i. Mass Production of Trichogramma sp. and Trichogrammatoidea sp. ii. Mass production of Bracon hebetor iii. Mass production of Goniozus nephantidis iv. Mass production of Chelonus blackburni v. Mass production of Trichoderma viridae vi. Mass production of Beauveria bassiana vii. Production of the nuclear polyhedrosis virus of Helicoverpa armigera viii. Mass production of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant ix. Mass production of Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricious) x. Mass production of Scymnus coccivora Ayyar xi. Mass production of Anthocorid bugs xii. Mass production of Reduviid predators xiii. Mass production of Chrysopid predetor 98-131 98 103 104 104 105 107 109 111 114 117 120 122 126 CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 1 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 1. FARMERS FIELD SCHOOL FOR INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT Farmers Field School (FFS) :   Farmer Field Schools (FFS) is an agricultural school of farmer which is conducted by the farmers on their own fields. This is research based learning through non formal education(NFE)   FFS provide opportunities for learning by doing. It teaches basic agricultural and pest management skills that make the farmers experts and perfect on their farms in decision makings .   FFS is a forum where farmers and facilitators debate on ob servations , shows experiences and present new information to come to the conclusion Aims of FFS   Empowering farmers with knowledge and skills   Making farmers experts in their own fields.   Sharpening the farmers  ability to make critical and informed decisio ns.   Sensitizing farmers in new ways of thinking and problem solving   Helping farmers learn ing how to organize themselves and their communities to become sound socially and economically. Essential elements of FFS : The group :   The group comprises of indiv iduals (30 farmers) with common interest s, forming the core of a Farmer Field School. The FFS tends to strengthen existing groups or may lead to the formation of new groups The Field :   The field is the school which has the facilities of training materials like plants, pests and natural enemies. In most cases, the groups provide a study site with a shaded area for follow -up discussions. The Facilitator :   The facicilitator is a technically competent person who leads group members through the hands -on exercise and facilitates the activities to arrive on conclusion . FFS establishment   Selection of right village for establishing FFS and the selection of right kind of farmers as trainees will greatly contribute to the success of the FFS. Prior to starting of FFS a t least two visits are required. First visit   It is expected that the FFS facilitators will be establishing FFS in their own area of posting and hence they shoul d be familiar with the villages profile based on the information that may have already, select potential villages for visiting. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 2 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Criteria and steps for village selection:   All approachable location/villages should be selected   With m aximum pest problems should be selected   High pesticide usage and related problems to be preferred   Irrigation facilities should be preferred   Too close to city to be avoided   No IPM training conducted previously   Political sensitiveness should be avoided   Fairly easy access should be preferred   Comfortable rapport between facilitators and farmers.   Aware with the purpose of visit by the village leader   Request him to invite all cotton/rice/vegetable growers (depending upon the crop chosen) for general meeting   Collect village profile   Area under crop cultivation   Number of farmers   Pest problems in previous crops   Pesticide usage in pre vious crops   Information about irrigation facilities   Request the village head to organize meeting in the following week.   Women farmers participation is also required   The date, time should be fixed in consultation with village leader   Social and economic stat us of the farmers To identify potential farmers site selection during second visit :   This visit should be one week prior to the first visit   Organize the general meeting as planned   Ensure participation from farmers, women farmers   Discuss the important probl ems related to crop management   Discuss about FFS structure   Outline of FFS   Nature of training   No provision of honorarium for attending the FFS   There will be refreshment in each session   The facilitator should announce the interested farmers to work as farmer facilitator Criteria and steps for farmer s selection :   The farmers should be typical of that area in terms of crop cultivation   Active farmers should be preferred   Should be energetic and physically fit   SC/ST / Women farmers should be given preference   Willing to learn at their own.   The village head will help in choosing right farmers.   Finalize the list of 30 farmers.   Request the selected farmers to attend the next meeting.   Conduct this meeting at least two week before commencement of FFS   Conduct signs and symptoms exercise   Conduct meeting with selected farmers   Hold participatory discussion to identify local problems related to total crop management   Identify local needs   Explain FFS activities in detail   Discuss farmers practice   Ask the farmers for their own practices to follow in farmers practice plot   Explain the farmers about IPM practices are to be followed in the IPM plot   With the consensus of the farmers, select suitable FFS field and training site   Finalize the inaugural day for FFS and check out program me Criteria and steps for field selection :   Select minimum of 2 acres   The field should be belonging to one farmer   It should be easily accessible and should not be too far from FFS village   The filed should be close to the meeting place (gathering place)   Some shady areas should be nearer to the field   No water stagnation in the field   No abnormalities in the field   Identify farmer who is willing to give the land for conducting field experiments and AESA   He should agree to follow the schedule of farming operation s as finalized by the farmers   He should agree to meet all the expenditure involved for both the fields except the IPM inputs for pest management.   He should agree to allow the farmer participant to work in that field to organize field day.   At the planning m eeting through participatory discussion with all selected farmers the facilitators should make verbal contract with FFS farmers.   The FFS day of the week CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 3 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   The time to start FFS session   The duration of FFS sessions   Norms/regulations/rules for FFS   Grouping of participants   Assign the name to each group   Allow the participants to select the leader for their group   Finalize the responsibilities of group leaders Base line survey : The base line survey should be conducted in FFS and Non FFS villages. All the 30 farmer s and 10 non FFS farmers from the neighboring village should be interviewed. The survey should be completed immediately after the selection of FFS village and farmers and prior to conducting planning meeting. Grouping of farmers: At the beginning of the FFS, the tr ainees will be grouped into five small groups and the grouping will be maintained till the end of FFS. Each group will be named by the beneficial insects after discussion with the participants. FFS gathering place : The FFS will have a gatherin g place, close to the FFS field, where the farmers will be able to assemble , make drawing of their field observations, discuss and make presentations   Close to the training field   Accessible to road   Provision for protection from sun and rain   Sufficient arran gement to accommodate to all participants   Select the site in concurrence with farmer participants. FFS Duration: The FFS should last for entire crop season. There will be a 14s essions during the period excluding FFS and field day. FFS session and durat ion: Each FFS session will last for 4 hours except for inaugural and field day. FFS shall run in the morning hours preferably . Norms and expectations:   The training norms should be set at the beginning of the FFS and clearly explained to the farmers.   All F FS farmers should be punctual in attending FFS sessions   The farmers should be committed and devoted to the work   Attendance will be maintained in every session   If any farmer remains absent for more than 25% of the FFS session , he should not be given certifi cate.   No substitute should be allowed. Facilitators :   Should have good experience in hand to conducting FFS   Should be punctual   Should give due respect to the ideas of the participants   Should be committed and devoted to the work   He can use inputs of the gro up Training methodologies :   Season long   Fully field oriented   Learning material is field and it is mainly based on learning group   Teaching science to farmers   FFS should have minimum lecture and maximum interaction   The basis for training approach is Non - formal   Training curriculum is based on local needs   FFS is characterized by free and open communication   Working in small groups. Objectives and quality indicators :   Grow healthy crop   Conserve natural enemies   Observe field weekly   Protect environment   Make farm ers expert in their own fields FFS curriculum : CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 4 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   Based on local needs and identified crop a general curriculum will be developed by the facilitators, prior to starting of the first FFS session. While developing the curriculum, the training obje ctives and quality indicators will be taken into consideration. The curriculum so developed at the beginning of the FFS will serve the guidelines for carrying out FFS activities. However, it should be remembered that changes in the curriculum topic/schedul e of activities can be made depending upon the prevailing situation but this has to be done in consultation with FFS participant farmers.   The training will focus on the four different areas as follows. FFS curriculum and time matrix. Item % of time share of the activities and time matrix Science and farmers 50%, 2hrs Group dynamics and team building exercises 30%, 1hrs Management aspects 10%, 30min Organization aspects 10%, 30min Science and farmers:   AESA of different practices and trials   Insect zoo   Relevant special topics Group dynamic s/Team building/I ce breakers exercises ; Organization and M anagement:   Work plan   Development   Organizing field days   Organizing FFS materials   AESA follow up All FFS session will have the following common activities   Recap itulation of previous session activities   Attendance of participatory farmers   Presentation of day s activities   Field visit for AESA   AESA drawing, analysis of observation, discussion and decision making by sub -groups   AESA presentation by group wise   Follow up of AESA/field action   Observation on experiments   Insect zoo set up and observation   Tea/ Refreshment break   Group dynamics   Special topics   Planning for next week   Review of days activities KEY CONCEPTS AND TECHNIQUES USED IN FFS Agro -Ecosystem Analysis : This entails both living and non -living things found in an agro ecosystem and the environment. The activity helps in identifying the functions of the organisms found in the ecosystem and how they interact among each other. Purposes of AESA :   Promote lea rning by discovery and learner with their own analysis.   Guide farmers to critically analyze and make better decision makers on their own fields. Why AESA?   It improves decision -making skills, through a field s ituation analysis by observing, all the biotic and a biotic drawing and discussion . CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 5 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management The following are to be noted while carrying out AESA : General Parameters   Group No.   Field No.   Date:   Week No.   General information   Crop & Variety   Date of planting./sowing   Stage of the crop   Spacing   Fertilizer   Weather   Time of observation   Plant population   Germination % Plant Parameters   Number of hills/Number of plants   Number of monopodiums/sympodia branches   No. of leaves   No. of diseased leaves   No. of dead leaves   Plant height   No. of pods   Treatment   Treatment schedule   Manageme nt practices   Plant drawing   Natural enemies   Observations   Soil moisture   Diseases   Insect pests   Rodent damage./live burrows   Plant health   Deficiency   Weeds   parasites   Predators   Recommendations   What management practices to be applied on crop production and protect ion aspects Long term experiments and field studies : The following field trials as participatory action research (PAR) may be adopted depending on the local needs of the farmers. The learning cycle processes to be employed through facilitating scientific methods in choosing the problems for experimentation. All the experiments to be conducted with single variable factors only with three /four replications. Care to be taken to record observations properly and timely. The emphasis is to gain experience on ski ll experimentation so that the same can be repeated in future. The following long term experiments will enhance the decision making ability of the participants in terms of plant compensation ability like defoliation experiments, removal of fruiting bodies, detillering etc.   Management practice trials   Plant compensation studies   Fertilizer trials   Spacing trials   Varietal trials   Water management trials   Any other need based trials   While taking observations in these experiments more emphasis should be given on rec ord of pest and natural enemies Insect zoo studies : Insect zoo studies in FFS helps in creating curiosity and interest among the participants and farmers. It creates conductive atmosphere for learning science in the field. Simple studies as functional rol e of the organism in the ecosystem, damage symptoms feeding potential and preference of predators, parasitization studies. This can be done using simple equipments such as plastic vials, containers, Petri plates, plastic cups and field cages etc. Special topics : Special topics support the AESA analysis involving more deeply on specific issues relating to ecosystem and IPM principles. Special topics sharpen the skill of the participants. It also provides training on basic experimentation methods. Special topics should be problem based and as per local needs and should be conducted in fields where the problems exist. List of special topics may be chosen from the following depending on the crop and crop growth. Example:   Selection of healthy seeds   Weed manageme nt   Soil and nutrient management   Water management   Aphid management   Thrips management   Leaf folder management   Stem borer management CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 6 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   Not all plant injury will result in yield loss   Case worm management.   BPH management   Leafhoppers management   Helicoverpa manag ement   White fly management   Pit fall traps   Identification of natural enemies   Post harvest technology   Augmentation of Trichogramma   Botanical pesticides   NPB   Bt   Pheromone traps, light traps, bird perches   Adverse effects of pesticides   Diseases management   Soil m oisture and its role   Soil characteristics   Concept of agro -ecosystem   Special topics on spiders   Harvest and post harvest techniques   Signs and symptoms of poisoning.   Rodent management   Safe use of pesticides Non-Formal education/Facilitation activities : On successful completion of the field the participants will conduct FFS and train farmers using NFE principles. Prime importance is to be given for NFE topics in the curriculum. The topics will help to strengthen farmers skills in facilitation, communication presentation and planning and to improve the individual contribution to the group . Optimum utilization of available resources (NFE) : As all farmers are not supposed to be literate, therefore the method of facilitating the entire activities of FFS shou ld be based on Non formal education (NFE). Farmers are from diverse groups in terms of socio -economic status, religion, caste, age, education, land holding, intelligence etc. Therefore, their participation should be facilitated in such a way so that they s hould understand that they are conducting serious FFS as per their requirements and skill. This will create their interest in the project. Pre and Post Evaluation In order to assess the level of IPM related knowledge before and after FFS and to know the impact of IPM training pre and post ballot box test are conducted Ballot box test : All ballot box tests to be conducted only in the fields. Five categories for questions to be covered.   Functional role of organism in ecosystem   Feeding potential of crop defe nder and life cycle   Damage symptoms   Plant compensation ability   Management aspects. Comparison of pre and post training evaluation results show a significant gain in the score as a result of the training impact. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 7 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Reporting / Documentation The facilitators s hould keep the records properly. They should spend one day in a week for preparation of r eports in the prescribed format to be sent to the headquarters weekly. Proper FFS records for all activities should be mentioned for IPM and non-IPM fields which will help to calculate cost: Benefit ratio. Village: Crop: Crop stage: Field day : At the end of the season, the participants should organize field day in which local policy makers and farmers from neighboring villages are invited to the field site. The facili tators should remain in the background on this day as the participants run the programme. Certificates are awarded to the FFS participants. Format of the certificate is given in annexure.(in local language to be awarded to the farmer) Other general guidel ines:   Farmers should be involved in planning for the FFS right from the beginning   All activities should be truly participatory   All efforts should be made to promote IPM through local media and inviting local leaders /progressive farmers to FFS   Must try to arrange visits by students and teacher from local school to FFS Post FFS activities : The post FFS activities such as follow up visit by the farmers and to encourage farmers to start IPM clubs. After 4 -6 visits the farmer participants should be encouraged to take up FFS activities which will help them to organize and continue FFS activities. Record keeping is an important activity. The facilitator should maintain one comprehensive record /register for each FFS. The record should contain the following.   Villa ge profile   Farmer s participa tions   Session wise activities carried out   Attendance   Raw data of all the observations made by the different group of farmers   List of materials purchased and supplied to FFS farmers with their acknowledgements   Important activit ies should be documented with photographs   List of bio -control agent supplied to FFS farmers, with their signature   List of technical literature supplied to FFS farmer s, with their signature   IPM kits supplied to farmers with their signatures.   FFS inaugural d ay with photographs   FFS field day with photographs   Visitors information with their comments   Name of state officers, scientists of SAU or KVK or any other technical experts involved   List of honorarium paid to experts with topics delivered.   Publicity obtaine d through media, copy to be pasted in the register.   Post FFS activities and formation of Self help groups.   FFS record register having farmers attendance should be countersigned by the village sarpanch/ADO of that area. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 8 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 2. ORIENTATION TRAINING PROGRAMME O N FARMERS FIELD SCHOOL Background : The Farmer Field School (FFS) is farmer education based, lasts for the 14 session and targets a group consisting of 30 farmers. The FFS consists of informal activities, which are hands -on and oriented towards improved de cision making. FFS will have a better impact when it is well planned: Orientation programme on FFS will meet to the following objectives:   Improvement in the knowledge on AESA   Improvement in the knowledge on special topics   Improvement in the knowledge on preparation of session guides/technical literature.   Improvement in the knowledge on facilitation skills   Improvement in the knowledge on skill in identification of insect pest, natural enemies and disease symptoms   Improvement in the knowledge on Non -Formal education.   To create confidence among facilitators to make the farmers self decision makers. Goal of Farmers Field School :   FFS training program mes are a process in which IPM becomes owned by farmers. They don't convince farmers to adopt IPM, farmers convi nce themselves .   FFS as a corner stone of sustainable agriculture seeks to improve farmer practices in order to create higher profits while improving environment quality and community health. Orientation training programme for facilitators for conducting FFS: Days Time Activities Day 1 08.30 -09.00 Registration 09.00 -10.00 Inauguration 10.00 -11.00 Concept of AESA -Field exercise 11.00 -11.15 Tea break 11.15 -11.45 Pre-evaluation test 11.45 -13.00 Drawing, presentation and discussion on AESA by group s 13.00 -14.00 Lunch break 14.00 -14.30 Team building exercise 14.30 -15.30 Insect zoo activities -Field exercises 15.30 -16.30 Adverse effects of pesticides -Field demonstration 16.30 -17.30 Use of traps 17.30 -17.45 Review of days activities Day 2 08.30-08.45 Briefing of days activities 08.45 -10.45 Collection of major (identified) pest of all stages and damage symptoms, collection of, natural enemies for the pest identified. Collection of diseases specimens 10.45 -11.00 Tea break 11.00 -11.30 Presentation and discussion on special topic 11.30 -12.30 Concept of Farmers field school Key factors for village selection, potential farmers site selection, discussion on bench mark surveys 12.30 -13.00 Discussion on Par experiments 13.00 -14.00 Lunch br eak 14.00 -14.30 Use of traps, preparation of session guides for FFS discussion 14.30 -15.00 Identification of symptoms of diseases 15.00 -16.00 FFS curriculum development by the facilitators choosing model crop 16.00 -16.15 Tea break 16.15 -17.15 Presentation and discussion on curriculum development 17.15 -17.30 Review of days activities 17.30 -17.45 Concluding remarks. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 9 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 3. FACILITATORS GUIDE FOR SEASON LONG TRAINING PROGRAMME (SLTP) Introduction: Green revolution has made India a country of food scarcity to the country of food surplus and provided food security to the nation. But it has made farmers heavily to depend on chemical pesticide for crop protection. The chemical control of agricultural pests has dominated the scene, but its overuse ha s led to adverse effects on farm budgets, human health and the environment, as well as on international trade. New pest problems continue to develop. Integrated pest management, which combines biological control, host plant resistance and appropriate farmi ng practices, and minimizes the use of pesticides, is the best option for the future, as it guarantees yields, reduces costs, environmentally friendly and contributes to the sustainability of agriculture . The need for sustainable agriculture is not pestici des but Integrated Pest Management. Hence Government of India has adopted IPM as its crop protection policy for the country. Integrated Pest Management: Integrated Pest Management means a pest management system that, in the context of the associated envir onment and the population dynamics of the pest species, utilizes all suitable techniques and methods in as compatible a manner as possible, and maintains the pest populations at levels below those causing economically unacceptable damage or loss. Definiti on: IPM is a knowledge -intensive and farmer -based management approach that encourages natural control of pest populations by anticipating pest problems and preventing pests from reaching economically damaging levels. All appropriate techniques are used suc h as enhancing natural enemies, planting pest -resistant crops, adapting cultural management, and, as a last resort, using pesticides judiciously Promotion of IPM -Government Policy : Government of India has initiated a number of positive steps for promotion of IPM in our country.   Establishment of Central IPM Centers   Registration of Bio -Pesticides   Human resource Development on IPM through SLTP   Farmers Field School Objectives of SLTP :   To create more trained man power to State Government for imparting IPM tra ining programme.   To give up the attitude of over dependence on chemical pesticides   To change knowledge, attitude and practice of crop protection functionaries for better management practices   To use the modality of FFS as a learning tool for pest managemen t.   To create confidence to participants to solve field problems faced by the farmers   To orient the participants knowledge, attitude and practice towards IPM   To work in group co -hesion   To provide opportunity to learn through discovery   To find solution to pr oblems through Participatory Action Research(PAR)   To understand the concept of AESA as decision making process   To motivate and to establish IPM clubs in FFS villages Approaches - SLTP:   Field oriented   Creates confidence to trainees to face field problems Components of SLTP :   Funds   Facilitators   Supporting staff   Participants   Field guide   Training facilities Funds : Funds are essential to conduct season long training programme on IPM. To conduct 30 days SLTP involving 30 participants plus 7 resource persons an d four supporting staff a reasonable fund is required. Items of expenditure :   Arrangement for inauguration   Accommodation arrangements for facilitators, participants and supporting staff   Honorarium for facilitators and supporting staff   Training materials (I PM kit) for participants   Training materials for field exercises   Field materials   Stationery   Transport arrangements CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 10 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   POL   Communication expenses   Medical expenditure   Honorarium for experts from outside   Arrangements for field day   Valedictory   Miscellaneous expen ses General co -coordinator : The training programme should have general co-ordinator who is responsible for training expenditure and maintain the accounts for submission to HQ. The general coordinator should spend as per financial guidelines provided and periodically monitor the accounts to not exceed the limit of sanctioned budget. Reso urce persons & Supporting staff: The trainers are known as resource persons or facilitators and trainees as participants. Role of Resource persons : Resource persons provid e facilities needed for training. He plays the role of friend, facilitator, catalyst, educator, communicator, listener, organizer, and motivator. The selected person should have adequate IPM field experience and have undergone previous SLTP training progra mme. The resource persons are assigned to groups (numbering five to six)as per number of groups formed during the training programme. The floating resource persons are specialists temporarily drawn to deal special topics, panel discussion etc. They should be from ICAR, SAU, State Department, research institutes, NGOs etc. Supporting staff : There should be minimum of four supporting staff. (Including drivers) They should support general coordinator to assist in day to day purchases, maintenance of accounts, preparation of reports and communication works etc. Participants: The ideal strength for SLTP is 30 participants.PPA/APPA (IPM) will approve the nomination of 30 participants. The General coordinator before commencement of the training should obtain nom ination letter from their controlling officer and he should submit his personal profile with contact address If participants from different states, grouping should be done mixing all with at least one member of host state in each group. 30 participants ca n be grouped into five groups for providing good facilities. Each group should be called in the name of beneficial insect. Each group should select a leader and the group should remain throughout the training programme and should work as a team. Syllabus and field guide: The National IPM leader should arrange curriculum development committee at least one month before the training programme. The members of the training programme should be General Co -ordinator, Technical Co -ordinator, two technical experts. Two scientists from SAU /ICAR While framing the curriculum the committee should take into accounts the principles of IPM   Training Facilities: essential elements required for conducting SLTP   Office room   Accommodation for resource persons and supporting sta ff   Arrangements for food and refreshment   Class room facilities   Transport   Training site   Fields for conducting exercises   FFS villages   Recreation room for participants   Medical facilities   Support from Department/SAU/ICAR Office room: It is just like training control room, should have the facilities such as telephone, computer, Xerox machine, place to keep IPM kits, stationery and training materials for field exercise. The general coordinator should have an administrative staff to look after the general adminis tration and maintain accounts pertaining to the training. Accommodation: Good accommodation should be provided to all participants and resource persons involved. All resource persons along with participants should stay in the training venue itself. Arrang ement for food and refreshment: The general coordinator should appoint food committee, where the participants must prepare menu within the sanctioned budget and food and refreshments should be supplied to the participant s resource persons and supporting s taff, visitors etc. Deficiencies in not supplying timely may upset the training atmosphere. Class room facilities : Class room facilities are required for participants to assemble, analyze, discuss and present the data collected from fields. The class CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 11 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management room facilities may also be used for panel discussion and to have discussion with experts. Normally it should be carried out during afternoon hours. Rooms should have minimum of 45 chairs, writing and display boards, slide projector, OHP and other training m aterials like drawing paper, sketch pens, cello tape, markers etc. Transport : At least two mini buses and one Jeep are required for the participants and resource persons are needed to meet the transport requirements. The transport is required to visit FF S villages, study tours, field visits and to provide transport to floating resource persons. Regular vehicle with drivers may be drawn from Central IPM centers and from Department of Agriculture (Host state) Training site : Training site should have at lea st five acres with different stages of crop growth. FFS villages : Since participants are divided into five groups, five nearby villages should be selected for conducting practice FFS sessions.30 farmers from each village are to be identified. They will as semble on a specific day during morning hours to conduct FFS sessions. Field day is conducted during last day of the session.FFS farmers are subsequently encouraged to form IPM clubs to promote IPM. Recreation room : Since training site is normally away fr om town participants and resource persons need recreation after training hours. A separate room may be provided to play indoor games and to make newspaper/magazines available with TV facilities. The resource persons and facilitating group members can meet and plant for the next day activities. Medical facilities : First aid boxes should be made available to the training site. Essential common medicines for cold fever, dysentery, diarrhea, headache, body pain may be stored in office room may be given to participants as and when need arises. Support for SAU/ICAR/ARS : It is better to select training site from ARS/SAU/ICAR institutes. This will have facilities for accommodation, experimental fields also scientists for panel discussion. SLTP field guide : The cu rriculum should be based on the principles of IPM while drafting the training curriculum before the commencement of the training based on the principles of IPM. Principles of IPM : Integrated Pest Management (IPM) for sustainable agriculture seeks to impr ove farmer practices in order to create higher profits while improving environment quality and community health. In order to do this IPM implementation is based on four practical principles:   Grow a healthy crop   Conserve natural enemies   Observe field reg ularly.   Farmers become experts These principles describe the main actions of IPM implementation. Specific processes that take into consideration the variation of each field and farm family backup each principle, so that decision making process will be don e on a field -by-field, season -by-season basis. Each principle is described below: Grow a Healthy Crop means using varieties resistant to major pests and diseases but well adapted to the local environment. The principle also includes using proper fertilize rs (chemical and organic), irrigation, and soil management which are critical for a healthy plant. A healthy crop can resist diseases and compensate for damage caused by diseases and insects so that plant injury does not always lead to yield -losses. A robu st healthy crop is the first step in IPM methods, and foundation for an optimal yield. Conserve Natural Enemies . In all agricultural ecosystems, there are predators (e.g. insects, spiders, frogs, etc.), parasites and diseases which attack eggs, larvae, nymphs, pupae, and adult stages of insect pests. These "natural enemies" occur naturally in all fields, orchards and vegetable fields. They biologically control most insect pests most of the time. Learning to recognize and manage these natural enemies is one major focus of IPM training so that they are not destroyed by unnecessary applications of herbicides, insecticides and CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 12 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management fungicides but are allowed to work for the farmer's benefit. Conserve natural enemies : Observe Fields regularly is necessary to asse ss crop development, diseases, weeds, rats, and Insect pest populations. In most cases, an experienced IPM farmer does this observation during a short time (usually less than a few minutes per field) while carrying out other crop maintenance activities (irrigation, etc.). Observations should determine how the crop is growing and if there are pests or usually present and sufficient to keep pests at low numbers. Weather conditions, soil nitrogen levels, and degree of host plant resistance will determine if diseases will subside or become more serious. In the case of rats, community level dynamics determine rat infestations and control programs. IPM Farmers must be knowledgeable of these factors to properly and economically manage crops. In some cases natural e nemies, plant resistance and plant compensation cannot prevent yield -losses due to weeds, rats, insects, or diseases. Proper assessments must be made to effectively and profitably manage the use of inputs such as labor, quality seed, resistant varieties, f ertilizers, drainage systems, community organizing and pesticides in order to ensure profitable production. Observation skills and decision making are key to becoming an expert IPM farmer and require field level practice for most farmers and extension staf f. Farmers Become Experts is necessary for a modern agriculture in which farmers are responsible for farm level management. Future gains in yields, profits, and sustainability will be the result of farmers making better use of available and new techn ologies and limited resources. More emphasis in all agriculture programs must be placed on the ability of farmers to make better decisions, increase their own efficiency, and become better managers. The future of food production and food security will depe nd on how well farmers can innovate and manage systems. IPM is implemented by farmers and thus requires an emphasis on farmers' skills and knowledge. Basic Concepts and Assumptions :   IPM is not a "packaged technology" that is "adopted" by farmers. IPM is a process of decision making and farming which is gradually improved with greater ecological knowledge, and observation skills.   IPM skills and concepts are best learned, practiced, and debated in the field. The field is the best teacher. Stay away from energy intensive multi -media lecture halls.   Season -long training courses allow all plant, insect, disease, and weed development processes and management to be observed and validated over time. IPM training must be carried out over all crop stages.   Farme rs must be allowed to actively participate and share their experiences during training to achieve maximum interest and effectiveness. Local or indigenous knowledge of the environment, varieties, pests, etc. must play a major role during decision making.   Trainers must not lecture, but should facilitate a process of learning. Trainers do not convince farmers, but rather provide structured experiences so farmers can test IPM methods and convince themselves about which are useful and which are not.   The content of IPM training programs for extension staff and farmers are not limited to the traditional "plant protection methods" (e.g. mechanical, biological, cultural, mechanical, and ETLs) but also includes the following: CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 13 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Crop development and physiology Agronomic methods for a healthy crop Varietal impact for maximum yield Soil fertility management for higher yields Minimize Pest insect and damage impact Conserve natural enemies Helps to develop Observation skills Helps to focus on envir onmental issues to understand managerial skills Economic threshold Level & AESA :   Economic threshold levels (ETLs) are not used for field level decision making throughout most of this Facilitator's Guide. The ETLs are replaced with the Agro - Ecosystem Analy sis methods that integrate more decision making parameters. The reason for moving away from ETLs perhaps should be explained here since most IPM programs are based at least to some degree on ETLs.   The first and greatest problem of ETLs is the variability of parameters used for ETL computation. The three main parameters of the ETL are management costs (Rs/ha), the commodity price (Rs/kg), and the damage coefficient which is the rate of yield loss per damaging factor (e.g. kg/ha loss per degree of soil droug ht, or kg/ha loss per density of insects no. /hill). Management costs depend on the type of compounds used (cheap or expensive), access to tools (owned or rented), labor costs (own or hired), differences between regions (near cities or far from cities), an d many other conditions. Commodity prices are stable in some areas for crops, but prices for many crops often fluctuate depending on local markets. Finally, the damage coefficient will vary according to the variety, water availability, weeds in the field, nutrient levels, weather, farmer competence in growing the crop, disease infection, stage of the plant, plant spacing, etc. More important is that not all injury leads to yield loss. In the case of over -compensation displayed by some crops (e.g. cotton), s ome injury actually leads to an increase in yields. In the almost all cases, published ETLs do not apply to the field situation at hand. The computed ETL applies only CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 14 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Developing an IPM training program requires several steps in order to build the necessar y scientific knowledge, cadre of trainers. The national seasonal long training programs have found that the following steps are essential for IPM training to move from a "good idea" to an established national IPM training programme. Step 1. Curriculum sett ing Step 2. Arrangement for Core Trainer - Facilitators Step 3. Carry -out Season -Long Training of IPM Trainers Step 4. Implement Farmer Field Schools Step 5. Develop follow -up activities Training of IPM Trainers : It is assumed that recruits for Core IP M trainers already are proficient in growing crops from land preparation to harvest. It is also assumed that they have a good knowledge of the crop ecosystem and are comfortable with working full -time in the field. The Core IPM Trainer's course will focus on those I. Course content   Training management of SLTP for IPM Field Trainers   Leadership skills   Non-formal adult education skills   Work plan, and proposal development skills   Problem solving and supervision skills II. Duration The refresher Training Course is typically 5 days in length and can directly precede the SLTP for 30 days duration. The refresher training program should carry out basic activities on non -formal adult education methods and theory, leadership methods and theory, and management m ethod s (work plan development) (Curriculum for refresher training course enclosed) . The training program should also review the curriculum for the season -long training based on local need, crop and field situations. Season -Long Training of IPM Field Train ers: The Season -Long Training of IPM Field Trainers is the basic course required for field trainers to become proficient in growing a crop, in implementing IPM, and in learning how to implement IPM training through the Farmer Field School model. The seaso n-long duration of the program is to insure that all crop stages are studied and all management decisions are seen through to their economic ends Objectives :   By the end of the course, the trainers will be able to:   Grow a healthy crop   Make effective plant protection field decisions dealing with insect and disease pests, rats, weeds, birds, and snails (where appropriate) while considering local ecological, social and economic situations.   Solve new problems presented in the field.   Initiate training fa rmers using the Farmer Field School education model Rational for Season -long Training.   The season -long nature of training is required for several scientific and social factors including;   Pest problems are specific to each stage of crop so training shoul d be carried out over all stages of the crop.   Population dynamics, disease epidemics, plant compensation, and crop development are processes completely.   The outcome of management decisions made during one crop stage is observable only at another later cr op stage, and most often at harvest (e.g. profitability, yield and yield components) .   Extension workers are often isolated from scientific and social advisors and therefore must be able to solve most problems without outside assistance. Longer field based training provides these skills Training methodology: Training methodology is adopted to implement the syllabus is participatory training methods. It is learning by doing on the line of Non -Formal education. Hence participants feel to express themselves, i nvolve actively and have higher motivation. Participatory approach gives priority on experiences sharing, on farm experimentation and exercise, case studies, role play, brain storming, group dynamics, group discussion, assignments, panel discussion etc. Fi eld exercises on SLTP should be arranged on participatory training method. Field exercise guide for the specific crop should be on the model of field guide of discovery based exercises for rice IPM as given below. Significant activities of SLTP Crop Physi ology : Studies of crop physiology: when a crop attains different stages, pests and diseases occurrence also vary. Hence the participants should have through knowledge on morphology and physiology of CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 15 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management different stages of the crop like seedling, vegetative, flowering, pod formation and grain maturity stages. Participants should collect plants from each stage and study plant characteristics viz plant height, number of branches, leaves, flowers and fruits, influence of a biotic and biotic factor on plants. Plant compensation ability, management practices to overcome adverse a biotic and biotic factors. Before commencement of the training arrangement should be made In the training site to have different stages of crop growth so that the participants can study all stages of the crop within the training period. Agro ecosystem analysis : It is a field exercises mainly used as a tool to educate the participants/farmers to analyze the field situation and make a decision about actions required in the field. It is a group exercise having set of rules and is carried out under the guidance of resource persons.. It consists of four stages. Field observation, analysis of observation data, drawing and presentation. Participants/farmers groups have to carry out AESA every prescr ibed day in a week and in their drawing charts should make recommendations for implementation during the week. It is a vital exercise to make participants/farmers experts in the field on decision making process. Special topics : To deal the topics such as water, weed nutrient management, management of soil and disease management. Special topics should focus on major pest, symptoms of their damage, management practices, insect ecology; pesticide poisoning, adverse effects of pesticides etc may be discussed. The topics are also given. Participatory Action Research : This exercise involves participants in studying field problems and finding solutions to them. It is primary learning strategy for empowering participants and only secondary as producing results. It is mainly used as collective investigation to initiate community actions on solving local problems. It is normally a season long exercise with weekly observation and decision making. The models for PAR are also given. Varietal impact, IPM vs. Non -IPM, sim ulation studies, water management and Nutrient management etc. PAR encourages participants/farmers to play a central role to find solutions to their field problems. Non formal education : NFE is an activity or force which works to achieve common goal of the group. Each group has a leader and takes a collective decision. Once collective decision is made, then execution is the responsibility of all members of the group. The leader must accord due recognition to all members in achieving the group s goal. He should not take credit for himself. It is a team building exercise from which group members learn how to work together and contribute for the success of the group. It creates healthy competition between the groups and motivates for high involvement. The g roup dynamics should provide enjoyment to the participants by breaking the monotony and to come out with desired results. The example of group dynamics are water brigade, tower building message relay nine dot game, no lifting of pen etc. Farmers Field Sch ool Activities (FFS practice session) : SLTP has in build provision to conduct FFS simultaneously. This provides opportunity to participants to understand field based learning experiences involving the farmers, the need to transfer IPM skills immediately t o the farmer and to conduct FFS after SLTP During SLTP five participants groups are conducting FFS on the crop selected for IPM training. Hence organizer should select a training time when SLTP site and FFS villages have the crop selected for the training . Normally whatever participants learnt in SLTP during the week period in on the basis for preparation of lesson plan for conducting FFS in the week or participants can make file visits to FFS village one or two days in advance, observe crop condition and prepare lesson Plan for FFSs A model FFS curriculum is developed and enclosed. Each group visits the village on a particular day in a week, meets 30 selected farmers and conduct FFS session. A set of activities to be carried out during FFS sessions are also given. FFS farmers should undergo pre and post evaluation tests. The main aim is to introduce IPM concepts and principles. FFS farmers should be encouraged to form IPM clubs to continue IPM activities. Course evaluation : SLTP needs periodic evaluation to assess the training impact. Evaluation activities strengthen training design and increase feeling of ownership. Pre and post evaluation are carried out through ballot box test methods. Mid  term evaluation is carried out by written test in the middle of the training programme. Daily evaluation is done by CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 16 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management itemized response technique i.e. Inviting opinions of participants about the training activities and listing out good things and for wrong things for improvement needed on the day and suggestions for improvement. Resource persons should take immediate steps to act on suggestion on improvements. Such feedback provides information about learning and feelings of participants to the resource persons who can re -orient the training activities to the extent poss ible in response to feed back. Activities for SLTP in detail Course Activities : The objectives are met through intensive study. There are season -long field activities which provide plant protection concepts, crop production skills, and Farmer Field Scho ol training skills. There are also topic specific activities that are completed in a two to four hour sessions. All topics are learned through experiential hands -on activities, allowing for maximum learning to take place. The methods are designed to build on the current level of experience, knowledge and skills of the trainees. The TOT participants are divided into teams of 4 -6 participants. The inter -related training components in the Training of IPM Field Trainers field course include the following: Season-long Field Studies carried out by trainees :   IPM vs. Farmer Practice Comparison (to be carried out by all training groups). All field work carried out by trainers including production, data collection, data analysis, and report writing.   Classical IPM Field Studies (2-4 studies per training group). All field work is carried out by trainees including production, data collection, data analysis, and report writing. Examples of Field Study titles : Nitrogen efficiency and impact on pests P or K response and impact on pests Variety evaluation and impact on pests De-tillering plant compensation simulation Defoliator plant compensation simulation No spray on susceptible and resistant varieties CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 17 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Weed management comparisons Collection of natural enemies, disease, insect pest Topic Specific "Field Guide Activities" are carried out in the field or open room and focus on the following IPM skill and concept areas:   Stage specific plant physiology and plant compensation   Diseases a nd epidemiology   Weeds   Insect pests, detritivors, and natural enemies   Ecosystem management (sampling, decision making)   Agricultural poisons   Health and environment issues   Group dynamics, Non -formal education   Management Skills (work plans and leadershi p) Non-Formal Adult Education Methods & Processes: During the SLTP trainees will learn about NFE methods and processes and group dynamics. They will develop skills to act as a facilitator during farmers' training in which farmers will discover through ex periential learning ecological relations in the crop ecosystem. Management skills : Trainees will also learn other skills, e.g. budgeting, necessary to conduct and organize FFS in their own districts . Special topics : Delivered by experts on specific top ics. These topics should cover specific areas of interest to IPM including technical and social aspects. The involvement of NGO's, universities, researchers, and others during this time provides the participants with exposure to numerous resource persons a nd topics of local value and not already included in the course materials. Farmer Field School (FFS) : Planning should be carried out during the SLTP period. Planning includes decisions on how participants will be chosen, where the FFS study field will be situated, time of implementation, weekly topics, , opening ceremony, Field Days, certificates for farmers, and other aspects of making an implementation plan to be approved by local state officials ,University etc) A "Field Day" should be organized at the end of the SLTP for participants to present the result of field studies, field guide activities, and FFS planning. The goal of the Field Day is to ensure that participants will be able to implement IPM programs in their area. The success of the trainin g programme is determined by the participants work after the SLTP Training/Facilitation Team: The Season -Long training programme should be carried out by a Training/Facilitation Team in addition to the support staff necessary for training logistics. The T eam should have one or two trainers with experience in running Season -Long IPM training, have extensive experience in the field as well as in running the day to day management of a SLTP While Senior Trainers manage the SLTP implementation, the Facilitator/ Training team will carry out day to day supervision and teaching of the participants. The team members should have already participated in the Core Trainers Training and have practical field skills since they will be in the field with participants on a dai ly basis. A ratio of 1 trainer to 5 participants is desired. This team should be at the SLTP site one week before the training to make preparations. This team should also meet daily to prepare for training, and make a daily evaluation of the program. Durin g actual training, the senior trainer can lead many activities, but it is preferable if the trainers share in this responsibility until participants can take over some of the training activities The Training Team should maintain open communication with par ticipants with frequent formal and in -formal evaluations/discussion on the progress of trainings. Weekly Training Programme : CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 18 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Each morning, the teams will spend time in their Field Studies to take care of the field (irrigation, weeding, fertilization, pe st management, etc.), and collect data for the Field Study implementation. No. Day Activities 1 Monday Crop physiology Agronomy 2 Tuesday Agro ecosystem analysis field observation, presentation and discussion, Non formal education 3 Wednesday Participa tory action research, Special topics, Non formal education 4 Thursday Insect pests, natural enemies, panel discussion 5 Friday Farmers field school and feedback from FFS 6 Saturday Field visit and review of weeks activities Study fields:   Study Fields with a total area of about 5 Ac for 40 trainees will be needed for field work during the training. The fields should be close (walking distance) to the training site.   Pre-SLTP Preparations   There are numerous pre -TOT preparations that must be done 2 to 3 w eeks prior to the course initiation. Usually this will require one or more SLTP trainers to be on si te before the training begins.   Field Preparation should be done beginning 2 -3 weeks before the beginning of the SLTP. If the trainees are too learn how to prepare land, and then set aside a small area for experience. However, to save time the fields should be ready for layout of field studies and p lanting before the SLTP begins.   Materials for training should be listed and bought before training. Seed, fertil izer, manures, field signs and labels, etc. should be ready on the first day of training. Other training materials such as paper, markers, name tags, hats, shirts, etc. shoul d also be purchased beforehand.   Logistics such as transportation, sleeping arrange ments, meals, bathing, clothes washing, telephone/mail service, newspapers, recreation (football, badminton, TV, video), religious services, etc. should be considered before trainees arrive.   A pre -test (field based ballot box style, and/or written exam) sh ould be prepared to test trainees during the first days of the SLTP. The pre-test should be field based to test recognition of insect pests, diseases, weeds, natural enemies, damage, etc. as well as problem solving. A written pre -test could also be given to test basic knowledge on life cycles, pesticides, health and environmental issues. The pre -test should be repeated at the end of the course to help evaluate the effectiveness of the training . Resource Persons :   Resource persons are non -resident trainers and other experts that can provide practical inputs to the SLTP. Typically, researchers, university professors, international visitors, NGOs, and others can provide some refreshing input to the season -long training. However, it is important to provide som e tips to these resource persons   Go to the field together for field walks where questions and answers can take place.   Leave slides and lectures until after field interactions.   Request the resource person to be as "participatory" as possible.   Be sure tha t the resource person gives an address and other contact information for future reference by trainees. Farmers' Field Schools (FFS ) (Practice FFS sessions) : The SLTP is designed to prepare participants to become trainers in FFS is to be organized during the SLTP course, 5 FFS should be organized in communities nearby the SLTP site. Villages and farmer groups will need to be identified before the start of the training. The fields used in the training (about 1000 m2) should be of same crop age around the sa me time as the training will start. One team of participants is responsible for conducting one FFS. A FFS usually consists of about 25 farmers, which will also work in groups of 4-6 persons during the FFS. The FFS will run in the morning once in a week. The trainers will be able to use experiences gained and exercises carried out during the previous week with a farmers  group. The programme for the FFS will be planned every week together with the trainers. Ecosystem analysis will be done every week by the farmers. Special topics will be carried out as well every session. Snacks should be served. At the end of a FFS, a "Field Day" will be organized to present the results of the FFS, other farmers, agricultural staff, and local government officials in the community. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 19 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Farmer Field School Objectives:   Describe the development of the crop.   Describe plant compensation and give an example of the importance of plant compensation   Identify the ecological function, life -cycle and give the local name of major insect d etritions, insect pests and natural enemies seen in the rice field.   Identify the local name and development factors of major diseases found causing yield losses in the field (if they exist).   Identify rat damage and rat habitat where appropriate   Describe th e toxicity of commonly used pesticides (herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, rodenticides, and molluscicides) and methods to avoid exposure to pesticides.   Describe the effect of pesticides (herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, rodenticides, and molluscic ides) on target pests, natural enemies, non-target pests, the environment and health of farmers and consumers.   Describe the level of potential yield -loss given a particular field condition and compare with the cost of controlling yield -loss factors (decisi on making).   Describe the potential development of pests in the field given the field conditions (plant development and stage, weather pattern, plant resistance, water levels, pests, natural enemies, etc.) and compare to potential management activity costs (irrigation, fertilization, pest control practices) that could be undertaken to improve yields and reduce impact of yield -loss components (decision making ) Farmers Field School Activities Agro -Eco System Analysis. (AESA) : 17Develop observation skills Cont . 20 Learn how plant compensates for damage by pestsContd  18 Carry out simple field studies  to identify and count pests and beneficial insects (Defenders) Cont . Insect Zoo studies : 21  Conduct Insect zoo studies and discover functions of organisms in the eco -systemContd  Non-Formal education : 10  Non-formal education approaches used throughoutContd  CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 20 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Learning through discovery: 12 Farmers discover & make decisions Contd  Farmers Field Schoo l Activities. Practice FFS Sessions (One month Programme) : The Farmer Field School (FFS) is typically season long training programme .However, during one month season long training programme the FFS practice sessions are restricted to four sessions only excluding post FFS activities. Each session begins in the morning and ends before lunch (one half day). The typical contents of the FFS are listed below.   IPM and Farmer Practice comparison trial. This trial is conducted on a 1000 m 2 plot supported by the FF S. 500 m 2 is used for the IPM field, and 500 m 2 is used for the Farmer Practice field. This 1000 m 2 field plot is used as the Study Field for the FFS. All other activities are conducted in these fields.   Field Trials. The Classical IPM Study on "Stem borer plant compensation simulation", "Defoliator plant compensation simulation", "Nitrogen efficiency including organic materials and impact of pests", "Seed Production", or other studies can be conducted in the field. Usually on one or two of these studies are undertaken by the FFS depending on major issues of the FFS participants. Topic Specific Field Guide Activities Are carried out in the field or adjacent to the field and cover areas related to IPM and Group Development. Weekly Schedule : Week 1: Opening ceremony with introductions, Ballot -box pre -test, Field walk, problems about pest/disease/deficiency, Drawing Together (team building) Ecosystem analysis, group dynamics Week 2: Agro -Ecosystem Analysis (decision making), exercise on Predators and parasite s. Crop physiology, group dynamics Week 3: Agro -Ecosystem Analysis (decision making), bio -agents, group dynamics . Reduced Exposure to Pesticides & Pesticide Toxicity, health issues Week.4: Agro -Ecosystem Analysis (decision making) Diseases or other topic, Group dynamics, Post ballot test Post-FFS: Inform FFS participants of pre - and post-test scores . Make regular visits to follow -up activities Field Trials - PAR Model Objectives:   To compare IPM methods with local farmers practice on conventional methods Farmers   To make the farmers to realize the benefits of AESA   To make the farmers to understand the adverse impact on pesticides Method 1. Use the same agronomic practices for all treatments. Nitrogen applications should be basal, and one or two splits based on usual practices. If fertilizers are not the same for IPM and farmer practices, be sure to include this information on all yield graphs and tables. 2. Treatments. Use 3 to 4 replications per treatment with each plot at least 500m2. It is better to have a larger plot size and less replication for this study because of the movement of insect pests and natural enemies when pesticides are applied. T1. IPM methods; observation and agro ecosystem analysis T2. "Farmer Practice" or "Conventional Method". Make a survey before the beginning of the season and do not change during the season as a result of comparison with T1. T3. No-spray [optional, but desirable - every person should try to grow rice without spraying at least in their life - it will change your view of pesticides forever!] 3. Make weekly Agro -Ecosystem analysis of all treatments. Treat T1 as necessary based on field observations. Treat T2 based on initial survey and determination of conventional methods. Do not treat T3 with pesticides but do check i rrigation, and be sure to hand weed as necessary. 4. Measure yield at end of season. Analysis 1. Make graphs of the insect and natural enemy populations. 2. Make a cost -benefit economic analysis of all treatments. Include health and environmental impacts if possible. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 21 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Learning through Experiments: Model: Plant Compensation studies - PAR Model Objectives: To demonstrate the level of plant compensation due to damage similar to stem borer damage Methods 1. Use IPM agronomic methods 2. There are 10 treatments w hich should be replicated 4 times per treatment. Plots may be small. T1. At 14 DAT, cut 10% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T2. At 14 DAT, cut 20% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T3. At 14 DAT, cut 30% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T4. At 30 DAT, cut 10% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T5. At 30 DAT, cut 20% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T6. At 30 DAT, cut 30% of tillers in 1 m2 block. T7. At 55 DAT, cut 5% of panicles in 1 m2 block. T8. At 55 DAT, cut 10% of panicles in 1 m2 block. T9. At 55 DAT, cut 15% of panicles in 1 m2 block. T10. No tiller cutting: Control. 3. Cages may or may not be used. In the case that cages are not used, the actual level of damage should be computed for final analysis. 4. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller number, % dead hearts and % whiteheads. Note any other insect, disease or rat damage. At the end of the season, measure the yield of the 1 m2 block in each replication. Results 1. Compute the actual damage for each replication and treatment if there was any natural infestation. 2. Plot the yields for ea ch treatment. Discussion : 1. What was the effect of the simulated damage on yield? Was any plant compensation evident? What would happen if the nitrogen level was higher? What does this mean for usual farmer practice? Do sprays for defoliation reduce yiel d loss, or increase the chance for BPH resurgence? PAR - Model Yield and pest response to nitrogen dosage. Objectives:   To understand the nitrogen response study for observation of pests and yield effects   To know excess application of nitrogen results in l odging.   To know the excess application of nitrogen will result in increase of diseases such as blast and sheath blight Methods: 1. Use agronomic practices recommended for your area for all inputs but nitrogen. Nitrogen applications should be basal, and one or two splits based on usual practices. 2. Treatments. Use 4 replications per treatment. (Treatments with manures can be introduced as well). T1. O kg N/ha T2. 40 kg N/ha T3. 80 kg N/ha T4. 120 kg N/ha T5. 140 kg N/ha 3. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller number, plant height, disease intensity, insect pest density, dead heart %, whitehead %, natural enemy density. Measure yields at the end of season. Results: Plot sampled data against nitrogen levels. Economic analysis of inputs vs. yields. Discussion topics: 1. What was the effect of nitrogen on plant development and yields? 2. What was the effect of nitrogen on insect pests and natural enemies? 3. Which level was most profitable? Which level was not risky in terms of potential disease or lodgin g? 4. What do you conclude about the usage of nitrogen? What will happen to rice yields when nitrogen costs increase in twenty years with increasing petroleum costs? PAR -Model Simulation of Defoliation Objectives:   To understand the simulation effects of defoliation on yield loss   To know whether the plant ability to compensate the leaf damage Methods 1. Use IPM agronomic methods 2. There are 9 treatments which should be replicated 4 times per treatment. Plots may be small. Leaf cutting means to cut each lea f on the plant. 25% means one quarter of the leaf blade, and 50% means one half of the leaf blade. T1.At 14 DAT cut 25% of all leaves in 1 m 2 block. T2.At 14 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m 2 block. T3.At 30 DAT cut 25% of tillers in 1 m 2 block. T4.At 30 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m 2 block. T5.At 55 DAT cut 25% of tillers in 1 m 2 block. T6.At 55 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m 2 block. T7.At 70 DAT cut 25% of panicles in 1 m 2 block. T8.At 70 DAT cut 50% of panicles in 1 m2 block. T9. No leaf cutting: Control. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 22 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 3. Cages may or may not be used. In the case that cages are not used, the actual level of damage should be computed for final analysis. 4. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller number, % dead hearts and % whiteheads. Note any other insect, disease or rate damag e. At the end of the season, measure the yield of the 1 m2 block in each replication. Results : 1. Compute the actual damage for each replication and treatment if there was any natural infestation. 2. Plot the yields for each treatment. Discussion : What was the effect of the simulated damage on yield? Was any plant compensation evident? What would happen if the nitrogen level was higher? What does this mean for usual farmer practice? Do sprays for defoliation reduce yield loss, or increase the chance for BPH resurgence? Specimen Collections - Diseases and insect pest Disease Collection : Introduction : Diseases can be collected by collecting the plant parts which show signs of the disease. For example, for bacterial leaf blight (BLB), infected leaves of different stages of infection should be collected. When collecting the plant parts, collect the whole tiller and keep the base of the tiller moist. After returning to your room, place on the infected parts between sheets of newspaper. Place heavy objects s uch as books or mattress on top of the papers so that the plant parts are flat when dry. The dried plant parts should then be glued onto a heavy large piece of white paper. If it is difficult to glue the plant part to the paper, use strips of white paper l ike tape to keep the plant on the paper. After mounting, keep all sheets of papers flat and out of the sunlight. The collection can be kept in a large plastic bag to keep insects and mites out of the collection. Treat the collection with pesticide if nece ssary. Occasional drying of the collection will reduce pest damage. Note that collections are only a process in which to learn functions, structures and names of diseases. Labels are written in the lower right hand corner of the page on which the plant is mounted. All specimens should be correctly labeled with the following information where appropriate: Common Name (in local language) Name of collector Date collected, Place collected Ecological function Latin name with genus, species, and order . Thick pap er with writing in black ink should be used for dry labels. Thick paper and writing in pencil should be used for specimens in alcohol. Insect Collection : Introduction : Insects and spiders can be collected many ways. The best way is to sit in a field an d watch the insects and spiders to observe their activity and behavior. Keep a record of what specimens are doing in the field. Collecting can be done by hand, with a sweep net, or with an aspirator. Kill insects by placing the specimens in a bag with a sm all amount of alcohol or by placing the bag into a freezer for an hour. Insects, especially parasites and adult moths, can also be collected by collecting larvae or eggs in the field and rearing the insects until adult parasites or other insects emerge. Insects and spiders that are collected can be divided into two groups. First are hard -bodied insects which are usually adults. Second are soft - bodied insects, which are usually immature nymphs and larvae, and soft -bodied spiders. Hard -bodied insects should b e placed on pins and soft -bodied insects and spiders should be placed in 70% alcohol. All specimens should be correctly labeled with the following information where appropriate: First label Common Name (in local language) Host (plant or insect) CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 23 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Ecologica l function (plant feeder, predator, parasite, detritus feeder, etc.) Second label Name of collector Date collected, Place collected Latin name with genus, species, and order. You should use thick paper with writing in black ink for labels on pins. Thick paper and writing in pencil should be used for specimens in alcohol. Mounting large insects on pins should be done on pins on the right side of the thorax when the head is pointing away from you. For small insects, the insect can be glued on a triangular piece of paper using most any glue (see below). Clear nail polish is commonly used as glue for this kind of mounting. Keep the collection in a safe place away from ants and other insects. Dry the insects well using a desk lamp. Treat with insecticide if th e collection is being damaged. Keeping moth balls (paradichlorobenzene) in the collection will reduce insect damage. Note that collections are only a process in which to learn functions, structures and names of insects. The final product is nice to look at , and usually very impressive, but the goal of the collection is the actual collecting process. Collecting and mounting are good ways to get to know the insect and spider communities in your area, and to understand the ecological relationships between orga nisms in an ecosystem Crop Physiology - (Rice crop - A Model) Anatomy and function are closely related. A nose has holes (anatomy) so that air can enter the body (function). A plant's anatomy is important to study to understand the function. The vessels in the leaf (anatomy) are important for transport of water, nutrients and systemic pesticides (functions). Each week during the crop growth, you will collect, observe and draw plants. Use the microscopes or magnifying glasses for better observations. The mic ro view of the leaf surface is fascinating as are all other parts of the plant. Drawing is a tool to assist in observation, remembering and for recording what you have seen. Try to spend time to make detailed and well labeled drawings. You will find that a deep understanding of the plant is the first step in understanding the effects of disease and insects on the rice plant. You will also find out why not all injury caused by diseases, insects and rats results in yield losses. Plant compensation is importan t for reducing the effects of injurious organisms. Tillering Ability in Vegetative Phase Introduction : During the vegetative phase, the plant is growing very rapidly. The initial two or three small plants transplanted were simple plants consisting on one stem, a couple of leaves and a few roots. As the plant grows during the vegetative phase several changes are taking place. On modern high tillering varieties, two of these changes have important implications for pest management: tillering ability and leaf growth. Tillering ability is an important characteristic of the modern varieties. Traditional varieties generally have few tillers and each tiller is very tall. Much nutrient is used for a few tillers in traditional varieties. Modern varieties use the same nutrients for shorter plants that have more tillers and more potential for producing panicles. The ability of modern varieties to produce more tillers is related to their ability to use more nitrogen. In traditional varieties, more nitrogen result in tall er plant that are likely to lodge (fall over) at maturity. Modern varieties increase the number of tillers with increasing nitrogen. Each new tiller a really a complete plant. New tillers produce a stem, leaves, roots, and other new tillers. Tillers can be given names depending on where they emerge. The main tiller is the stem of the transplanted seedling. The primary tillers emerge from the main tiller. Secondary tillers emerge from the primary tillers, and tertiary tillers emerge from the secondary tiller s. The main tiller and the primary give most of the yield for the hill, especially on short maturing varieties. Secondary tillers also have good yield but are partly green at harvest. Many tertiary tillers may not produce a panicle if nutrients, sunlight, and water are not available. New tillers are produced from seedbed to about primordial stage. If the tillers from one plant in the hill are damaged early in the vegetative phase, more tillers will be produced by the other plants in the hill ("compensation" ). Early stem borer damage does not seem to effect yield because the tillers are easily replaced. The leaves on the tillers are also growing from seedbed to primordial stage. The leaves will emerge and later die. As the bottom leaves are dying, new leaves are emerging from the top. The process allows the plant to renew leaves that are damaged by the wind, insects, or disease. The new leaves are also able to grow larger because of the larger supply of energy from the plant as the plant grows bigger. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 24 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management The gro wth of the new tillers and leaves is determined by plant spacing, water, sunlight, and nutrients (fertilizers) available to the plant. Objective : To describe the growth of vegetative stage plants in terms of tillering ability and leaf formation. Time requ ired = 120 minutes Materials (per group) plants; 20 days after seeding (DAS), 15 and 30 days after transplanting (DAT), knife, pencil, papers. Procedures: (Do the following for each age plant) 1. Find fields of different ages and collect plants from the f ield. Wash all the mud from the plants. 2. Take the plants to a shady place and observe the plants. Begin by removing all the roots from the bottom so that the very bottom of the tillers is easily seen. Wash all mud from the base. Spread the tillers apart and notice how the tillers emerge from other tillers. 3. Make a map of the tillers by finding the primary, secondary and tertiary tillers. Carefully remove the tillers and note where they emerge. Find the first primary tiller and remove from the main stem . On this primary tiller, find the first secondary tiller and remove it. If the secondary tiller has a tertiary tiller, remove this tiller also. Continue this process until you have a map of the tillers on the plant. 4. Count the number of leaves on each t iller. Count the number that is dead. Notice if there are new leaves emerging. 5. Each person in the group should take a turn to explain the structure of one of the plants to the group using a map. Discussion and Presentation : 1. Describe the pattern of tillering from transplanting through the vegetative stage. 2. Why is continuous tillering important? 3. What will happen when some tillers are removed from the plant? 4. What is the effect of stem borers on the plant in the early phase. 5. What is happeni ng with the leaves on the different tillers? Are there dead leaves and newly emerging leaves? Way is this important? Roots and Plant Vessels Introduction : Fertilizers and systemic insecticides, such as carbofuran, are often applied to rice plants. How do these nutrients and insecticides get into the plant and then move through the plant? To enter the plant, the chemicals must be dissolved in water. Without water, the compounds will not be able to move either in the soil from the surface to the roots, or fr om the soil into the roots. Once the chemical are dissolved in the water, they are absorbed into the plant with the water. Once the chemicals are inside the plant, the chemicals are able to move through the plant through a system of hose -like vessels betw een the roots and the top of the plant. Water moves up these vessels and sugars move down the vessels. Insects feeding on the plant by sucking or chewing of the vessels ingest the insecticide. Plant hoppers and stem borers are insect pests which can be con trolled using the systemic insecticides because they feed on vessels. Hoppers suck on the vessels, and stem borers eat the vessels while feeding inside the plant. After the systemic insecticide moves to the leaves of the rice plant, water from the vessels is exuded each evening. This is the small droplet of water found on the tips of the leaves early in the morning. This drop of water on each leaf contains the systemic pesticide. The drop falls back in the water or evaporates each day. If natural enemies come into contact with the water they will be killed by the systemic pesticides. The drop of water often falls on natural enemies or natural enemies drink from the drop of water. This activity will show how water solutions move through the plant. Experim ent on crop physiology: Objective : 1. To describe how systemic insecticides move through the plant. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 25 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 2. To explain how systemic insecticides control insects sucking or chewing on plant vessels Time required = 120 minutes (Whole time not used. Best to run a ctivity while doing other activity.) Material : Water, red ink or food coloring, 2 cups per group, plants and 2 straws Procedure for one group : 1. Go outside and find many kinds of plants including rice seedling, grasses and other plants. 2. Add water to the 2 cups and place several drops of the red food coloring. The water should be dark red. 3. Place the plants in the cups with the stems in the cups. Also place the straws in the cups. One straw should be flattened first. Place the plants in a bright place. 4. Wait 90 minutes and observe the plants. What has happened to the color of the leaves? How has the red coloring moved in the plants? 5. What do you think happens with rice in the rice field when systemic insecticides are used? Where is the insecticid e in the plant? What kind of insects suck on the fluid in the plant vessels? What kind of insects chew on the plant vessels? What about insects that feed on the leaf edge? Do they also feed on the main vessels? 7. What happens after the solution reaches th e tip of the leaf? Have you noticed the water on the leaf tips in the evening and morning? Where does this water come from and what does the solution contain? How might the solution effect natural enemies in the field? How about farmers walking in the earl y morning field? DISEASES MANAGEMENT Background : Diseases are an important part of crop protection, but are usually very difficult to understand in the field. This is partly because the causal organisms (bacteria, MLO, fungi, virus and nematodes) are v ery small and cannot be seen moving around like insects or rats. We must learn new ways of thinking about these organisms in order to have long -term control. There will be four activities for discussing diseases. The topics will cover management methods, o bservation methods, epidemiology (the spread of disease), and causal organisms. The most important first step in thinking about diseases is to realize that diseases must be managed not controlled. What is the difference? Management means a complete set of activities that support each other. Management means that these activities are carefully planned and are implemented over several seasons, not controlled within a single season. Management included control methods for prevention, and control methods to slo w down epidemics; diseases will never be completely eradicated - only populations reduced to very low levels. Management usually needs the cooperation of several farmers working together to reduce overall disease in an area. Management requires someone who can observe larger areas of disease incidence and levels of infection. For an example, management of tungro in rice would be impossible without observing the larger picture of disease infection levels. The management system requires distribution of new va rieties, careful monitoring of GLH, monitoring of disease incidence, planting time coordination, and sometimes a break in planting rice. These are activities that are done by individual farmers, but managed so that the activities are carried out together. Think about the management needed to control other diseases such as polio, malaria, and small pox! What are management activities? Below is a summary of activities. Prevent the introduction of inoculums into the field in order to delay the beginning of in fection. This can be done by; a. Allowing only disease -free seed and planting materials (example, root stock for trees) into an area. This can be done at any level of organization. b. Destroy sources of inoculums such as materials in nurseries and fields w ith diseases. For large scale removal, it is useful to have funding (or insurance?) to compensate farmers for destruction of sources of inoculums (fruit trees, planted seasonal crops such as soybeans). c. Small areas planted to a particular crop before the main growing season for the crop should be avoided. These small areas build up inoculums which is then carried over to the next season. d. Farmer practice to keep disease inoculums from entering new fields. This is done by careful CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 26 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management purchase of materials in the market, seed suppliers and plant sellers. It is also important to keep nematode infested soil from moving from field to field on the shoes of farmers, animals, and plows. e. Sanitation is important to keep inoculums from one crop getting into the next crop. Potato blight (Phytophthora infestans ) can be reduced by removing excess old potatoes from fields. Prevent the development of inoculums after it enters the field. Removal and destruction of inoculums can be done before planting, during the cropping season and after the crop is harvested. Deep burial of diseased plant materials by plowing, removal of diseased plants, burning of crop residue while in the field or after collection, flooding fields, and repeated plowing to expose fields to sunlight (for nematodes) are some activities that may be beneficial. The effectiveness will depend on many factors which must be analyzed for each case. Crop rotation is important if the rotation reduces inoculums. Rotation of tobacco and tomatoes for example is not ro tation for the diseases which infect both crops. Crop rotations should be observed since there are many pathogens that survive on numerous types of both living and dead plant materials. Fertilization may increase or decrease diseases. Most people believe f ertilizers only increase diseases. However, there are numerous examples in which addition of nitrogen, potassium, or calcium actually reduced the effects of certain fungi. Management of the micro -climate is also important. Each site has a different micro -climate each season. A shady slope in the wet season will be different from a sunny slope in the same season. Crop planting times should take into consideration dominant diseases in the area and the effect of the micro -climate. Objective : 1. To outline mana gement activities that could be organized for an area to reduce disease incidence. 2. To use brain -storming techniques to increase/encourage inputs from all sources when problem solving or planning. Materials Newsprint paper (4 pieces per group) and mark er Steps (Brain -storming is a method of getting lots of creative ideas. Many ideas will not be useful, but the ideal will act as seeds to other ideas. Discussion of ideas is allowed only after all ideas have been written down). 1. Appoint one person as th e secretary who will write on the large pice of paper. DO NOT USE A SMALL PIECE because the whole group should be able to read the paper. Assign another person to be the facilitator. 2. The secretary should write "Wide -Area Disease Management" on the top o f a large piece of paper. 3. The Facilitator should read the above Background for the whole group. Each member should make notes of thoughts that come to them while listening to the reading. 4. After the reading, the Facilitator should ask the following qu estion: "What are activities that can be done in our village to manage diseases on our crops (all crops)." 5. The group members should tell the secretary their idea. The secretary will write down the idea. NO COMMENTS ARE ALLOWED BY OTHER MEMBERS AT THIS P OINT. If any member makes comments, the Facilitator must ask the person to be quite. 6. Continue writing down ideas with no discussion until the first page is full. 7. After the page is full, discuss each idea beginning at the tope of the list. The Facilit ator should be sure each person can make some comments. The Secretary should summarize the discussion on each point. Write the summaries on another large piece of paper. 8. Present the summaries of ideas to the whole group. 9. If there is time, do the same process with the following question, "What can extension staff do to help manage diseases in our village?  MANAGEMENT OF WEEDS Introduction : Weeds reduce yields by competing with the rice plants for sunlight, moisture, and soil nutrients. Weeds may affe ct farming in many ways. For example, fertilizer applied my not increase yields in weedy fields because weeds absorb nitrogen more effectively than the rice plants. Also weeds are harmful because they may be alternate hosts for insect and disease pests of rice, and provide shelter for rats. Usually weed problem is more serious in dry land and dry seeded rain fed than in lowlands. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 27 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management However, if both left to grow in the field it can result to reduce yields. Objectives: 1. Classify weeds according to economic significance. 2. Identify factors that contribute to severe occurrence of weeds in the field. 3. Develop management strategies for weeds. Time requirements: 90 minutes Materials required: marker pen, crayon, pen, and notebook Procedure: 1. Each group shou ld assess weed population in different areas in the rice fields. 2. Each group should collect as many different species of weeds from the rice field. 3. Each group should classify weeds collected according to their gross morphology, qualifying characterist ics (i.e. perennial or annual) and distribution. 4. Process data. 5. Distribute discussion question to each group. 6. Present and discuss answer with the big group. Cyprus Discussions questions 1. Among weeds collected, which weeds are difficult to cont rol? Why? 2. Based on your experiences, on what stage of the rice crop is critical to weed competition? 3. What are weed management practices can you recommend for direct seeded rice? For transplanted? 4. What are your general recommendations to manage we eds? 5. How will you justify that weeds are also useful to farmers? Rats Rats are one of the most consistent and serious pests of rice. The main problem of rat control is that rats must be controlled by community action, and organizing communities is not a n easy task. There are a few differences between rats and insects that make implementation of management different. First is the ability of rats to stay in one area even though there is no crop. This means that we can use damaged caused in one season to in itiate controls in the next season. The other difference is the methods of control. Rat control must be organized over a wide area to be very effective. Rat drives, baiting, digging, and any other method of control is most effective when done as a communit y. Rat Population Growth Introduction Rat populations increase very rapidly because rats have many offspring very often. Rats can live for one year or longer. Females may reproduce up to 4 times a year and have an average of 6 offspring in a litter. Th is exercise is designed to visualize simple population growth for one year. Objective 1. Able to show rat population growth over several months using nails, seeds or other items. 2. Able to ask leading questions about rat populations to bring out two manag ement points; (1) It doesn't matter how many rats were killed, it only matters how many rats remain in the field, and (2) continuous rat control is important to keep populations low. Time required = 120 minutes Materials (per group) 2500 Bengal gram seed s, glue and paper, pencil and pen Procedure 1. This can be done using nails on wood or seed on paper on the piece of large paper. 2. In the first section place 2 seeds. One nail represents one female rat, and the other represents a male rat. 3. Move to th e first month. Add 6 seeds for 6 offspring from the original pair of rats. 3 rats are females and 3 rats are male. 4. Move to the fourth month. Add 6 seed for 6 offspring from the original female, then add 18 CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 28 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management seeds for the 3 females in first month (3 femal es times 6 offspring each). Half of the nails are female rats. 5. Move to the seventh month. Add 6 seeds for 6 offspring from the original female, then add 18 seeds for the 3 females in first month (3 females times 6 offspring each). Add 72 (12 females wit h 6 offspring each) for offspring from females in the fourth month. Half of the seeds are female rats. 6. Continue this process for the 10th and 13th months. Write on the paper the total number of rats for each of the months, and the cumulative total from month to month. Discussion and Presentation 1. How many rats are produced in one year? (One section is three month) 2. If half of the rats are killed in the seventh month, how many rats will be produced by the end of twelve months? 3. If there are 10 fem ale rats in the first month, how many rats will be produced in the 13th month? If you organize a rat drive and kill this many rats, will you be very excited and call your rat drive a success? How many rats are remaining in the field? Do you think the rat d rive was a success still? How many rats will be in the field the next month considering reproduction? (Note that reproduction is even greater after many rats are killed because of less competition for food and space!) 4. What is the meaning of the saying " It doesn't matter how many rats were killed, it only matters how many are left in the field to reproduce". 5. Many farmers say that if you kill rats, they will bring their friends and completely destroy a field. Can you explain why fields are destroyed aft er one rat drive? (remember reproduction, and that reproduction is faster when the population is lower). 6. Why is it important to begin killing rats early in the rice? Why is it important to keep killing rats all season long? What would be the population of rats after 6 months if only 1 female from each group of six offspring survived? Totals by month; 1st month -6/ 4th month -24/ 7th month -96/ 10th month -384/ 13th month -1536/ Total 2046!!! INSECT ZOO Introduction The goal of the Insect Zoo is to help you learn about insects and their natural enemies by direct observation and manipulation. Insects and spiders are more interesting when seen alive and active. Think of going to the zoo...a tiger that is tearing the flesh from a rabbit is much more int eresting than a snoring tiger hidden in a corner. Imagine a spider sucking the juices from a writhing first instar stem borer larva or leaf folding by a leaf folder. A living organism is much more than what is seen in an alcohol filled jar. In fact some th ings can only be recognized when living - the small water striders ( Microvelia ) is an example. The ripples on the water as the water striders glides across the water surface are their most distinguishing characteristic. They are like sharks; they cruise ar ound in the water and when a larva or BPH drops on the water, a whole group will attack together. The activity and behavior of insects and natural enemies can only be seen on live specimens. The Insect Zoo will give you many living specimens for demonstrat ions that will keep farmers and others more involved while watching spider females eat their mating partners, and help them remember better something about the message that predators and parasites are friends in the field. The Insect Zoo will also help you learn about the biology of the animals. Life cycles, egg laying, feeding, mating, growth and behavior can be learned directly the process of rearing insects and their natural enemies. There are many ways to rear insects and their natural enemies. Many par asites can be obtained directly from their host by collecting eggs, mature larva, and pupae from the field and placing in a container of some type. Any plastic, glass, or paper container will work. Place the collected specimens in the container and merely wait. If the specimens were parasitized, the small wasps will emerge. Preying mantis egg cases, stem borer egg masses, large caterpillars, and hopper eggs are the easiest and most often parasitized specimens to rear. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 29 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management For other insects and spiders, collecti ng young hopper (BPH) nymphs, adult moths or spiders is the best way to begin rearing these groups. However, for nymphs and for adult moths, you must have prepared plants ahead of time. For spiders, it is best to have lots of insect prey in a rearing cage before beginning to rear. For parasites that are not collected from hosts, it is sometimes possible to put "sponge plants" in the field. This means that from reared insects you have plants in pots with egg masses or larvae. These plants with the host are p laced in the field for up to four days to attract the parasites. The parasites will lay their eggs in or on the host. The "sponge" is then brought back to the pot area and kept in a cage. Objective Rear the following insects and spiders for the life stages shown to understand the functional role.   Hoppers: adult to adult   Stem borer: adult moth to first instar   Leaf folder: adult moth to first instars   Rice bug: keep nymphs and adults for one week   Various larvae: larva to adult   Hunting spiders: keep for one w eek   Web -making spiders: keep until makes web   Ladybeetle larvae and adults: keep for one week   Other predators: keep for one week   Stem borer egg mass parasites: keep egg masses until adult parasite emerges   Leaf folder larval parasites: keep larva until adult parasite emerges   Other caterpillar parasites: keep larvae or parasite pupae (especially Apanteles) until adult parasite emerges   Demonstrate the following processes using the insects and spiders in your Insect Zoo. These are the most important processes in the rice ecosystem which effect the crop and pest dynamics.   Demonstrate hopper feeding on the plant   Demonstrate hopper development from nymph to adult   Demonstrate eggs in the stem of the plant   Demonstrate hopper mating   Demonstrate egg laying and egg mass es of collected adult stem borer moths   Demonstrate emergence of first instars stem borers   Demonstrate eggs and larvae of leaf folders   Demonstrate rice bug feeding on the panicle   Demonstrate adults of field collected larvae   Demonstrate predation of hunting spiders (number consumed per day) using hoppers for food   Demonstrate web -making of web -making spiders   Demonstrate moth predation by web -making spiders   Demonstrate larval and adult ladybeetle predation (number consumed per day) of hoppers Demonstration of predator -prey relationship Parasites emerging from especially Apantles parasite pupae Demonstration of leaf folder egg parasites Time Requirements for Insect zoo Each week at least two hours is needed special for the Insect Zoo. Materials CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 30 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Plants, cages, small plastic bottles, plastic bags Procedures for Rearing There are many ways of rearing insects and spiders. Below are some general methods and some specific tips for specific insects: General Rearing Methods 1. Bottles and Plastic Bags are very useful rearing tools. Always carry a couple in your pocket or bag. If egg masses, larvae or nymphs are found in the field, collect and place in the bottle or plastic bags. The bottle should have a piece of netting over th e mouth of the bottle. Add plant material daily for herbivores. Transfer to larger cages if necessary. Try to collect older larvae that will quickly pupate. Parasites will also emerge from egg masses, larvae and pupae. 2. Simple Cages can be made using was te materials such as transparent glass or plastic bottles. Place leaves and stems in the bottles with insects and cover with netting. For soft drink bottles, place a bouquet of stems and leaves in the bottle and cover with large plastic bag. For seedlings, invert the plastic bottles which have one end open and other end covered with netting material. 3. Field Cages are useful to cover infestations of large larvae, hoppers, and other insects. Make cages from large plastic bags, or netting materials. Use bamb oo sticks to hold the cages above the plant. 4. Potted plants and Cages is useful especially for demonstrations and exhibitions. Grow your own plant in the pot, or transplant from field grown plants. For cages use netting suspended strings or frames, or use plastic bags with netting glued over one end. Expensive thick stiff plastic is also very useful. 5. Be Creative! It is surprising where insects can be reared. Use discarded cans for pots, and transparent plastic bottles for cages. Clear glass jars and small plastic containers will suffice for most needs. Rearing Tips for Specific Insects These are only tips. You can probably improve on all of them. 1. Plant hoppers : Place at least 3 male and female pairs in cages on young (30 -40 HSS) plants. Allow mating a nd egg laying. After nymphs emerge (8 days after egg laying) remove excess nymphs to other plants when the nymphs are in the second instars. If the plant becomes brown, move the nymphs to new green and healthy plants. Alternative method is to place hoppers in cages on plants in the field. Be sure all natural enemies have been removed first. BPH eggs BPH 2. Stem borers : Collect adult moths in the field using hands or sweet net. The best way to collect is with a bottle so that the moth is not damaged. Pl ace the moths that look alike in cages on plants. Observe the egg laying. Wait for emergence of the first instars from the egg. 3. Leaf folders : Collect adult moths in the field using hands or a sweep net. The best way to collect the moths is with a bottl e so that the moths are not injured. Place many leaf folder moths in cages on young plants. Observe egg laying and wait for emergence of the first instars from the eggs. 4. Rice bugs : Collect nymphs and adults from the rice field. Place the insects on old er plants in the milky stage. Observe feeding and egg laying. 5. Other larvae : Collect larva in the field. Old larvae are easiest to rear to adult. Place the larvae in cages on plants of the same age as those in the field. If the plant is consumed quickly , move the larva to a new plant. Observe pupation and adult emergence. 6. Hunting spiders : Collect hunting spiders in the field. Place in cages with or without plants. To demonstrate feeding, do not feed the insects for at least one day before demonstrati on. On the day of demonstration, place several types of insects from the rice field in the cage. To show the number of hoppers eaten in a day, place many hoppers in the cage (count them first) then leave for one day. Count the remaining hoppers the next da y. 7. Web-making spiders : Collect web -making spiders in the field and place in cages on older plants so the spider can make a web. Observe web - making. After the web is made, place a moth in the cage and observe the results. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 31 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 8. Larva and adult ladybeet les: Collect larva and adult ladybeetles and place in cages with or without plants. Place young hoppers in the cage to observe feeding. 9. Stem borer egg mass parasites : Collect egg masses in the field. Place in small plastic bottles. Wait and observe emer gence of parasites or first instars. 10. Leaf folder parasites : Collect older parasitized leaf folder larvae and place in plastic pot. Wait for emergence of parasites. 11. Caterpillar parasites : Collect older parasitized larvae and place in plastic pot. Wait for emergence of parasites. 12. Parasite pupae : Collect parasite pupae (especially Apantles) and place in plastic pot. Wait for emergence of parasites Life Cycles and Food Webs Introduction Life Cycles of plants, insects and natural enemies are well known to us. The development from egg or seed to adult insect, spider or plant has been seen in the field and in the Insect Zoo. Food Chains are the interactions between plants, herbivores and natural enemies of the herbivores. The energy from one level o f the ecosystem (plants) moves to another level (herbivore) along a chain of interaction. As a trainer working with farmers, you must begin to integrate these two motions together into a smooth acting dynamic ecosystem. Seeds germinate to be eaten by insec ts that lay eggs that are parasitized....for example. Every life cycle is part of a food chain. In this exercise, you will have to put the two systems together so that they are functional. This will help you to understand that interactions have a time fram e. For example; the life cycle of hoppers (brown, white -back, and green) all begin with a egg stage inside the plant. In the next stage, the nymphs feed on the stem or leave by sucking. Finally adults mate and lay eggs on the same plant or migrate to other fields. During each stage, different natural enemies attack the hoppers. During the egg stage, parasites complete their own egg/larva/pupa/adult in the hopper eggs and kill the eggs, and mirid bug predators suck on the eggs. During the nymphal and adult s tage, hunting spiders, water striders, lady beetles, and other predators feed on the hoppers. Parasites live on the nymphs until nymphs are adults. Web -spinning spiders feed on flying hoppers as the move in the field. This combination of interacting life c ycles of the plant, hoppers, and natural enemies is a good view of the dynamic system of the rice field. It shows also that balance is needed in the system to make each life -cycle possible; for example, a spiders life cycle depends on the hopper. If there are no hoppers then there will be no spiders to protect the feed. In this system, insects such as hoppers at low population are actually very beneficial to the farmer because they are spider food, and spiders are what protect the field from large populatio n changes. Did you ever think that a hopper might be a beneficial insect to the farmer? It all depends on how many are in the field. This can be explained now by looking at how the system interacts. For this exercise, you will have to integrate much of you r knowledge into a big picture. It will not be easy to put the pieces together Also for this exercise you should think in terms of "guilds". Guilds are group organisms that have similar types of life cycles and share food sources and are usually attacked b y the same natural enemies. Hoppers are one example above. The many species of stem borers are another guild. Hunting spiders includes many species that hunt in a similar way and have similar prey. Try to use major guilds for this exercise than individual species. Objective After this activity you should be able to explain the interaction of the ecosystem factors using both life cycles and food chains for at least one guild of insect pests. Time required = 120 minutes. Materials Paper, pens, pastels, IPM TE XTBOOK Procedure 1. Each group should choose a guild to analyze; CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 32 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Hoppers, stem borers, leaf folders, leaf feeding caterpillars, caseworms, black and other bugs, rice bugs, gall midge, rats. 2. Draw a large circle and write in the general stages for insec ts of the guild around the circle (see example below). 3. On one side make a list of the stages of the insects in one column. In the next column, make a list of natural enemies (by guild) which attack each stage. 4. On the drawing, draw a circle for each n atural enemy which attacks a particular stage of the insect. On the natural enemy circle, write the stages of the natural enemy's life cycle. If their are natural enemies of the natural enemies (example, a spider that eats another spider) then make a third level of circles for these natural enemies. (USE YOUR TEXTBOOK TO GET MORE INFORMATION). 5. After finishing the diagram, do a short role play with another group. One group IPM experts is advising another group of farmers about the insect that was chosen. The group of IPM experts is very smart and they know that asking questions and making discussion is better than giving simple answers. So the IPM experts begin a process of discussing with farmers about the life cycle of the pest insect. (Most farmers know this, but farmers like to talk. Let them talk as much as they like by asking questions). Next, the groups of IPM experts begin to ask about the natural enemies of each stage. Many farmers know this, but the IPM experts may have to help them by giving hint s. (Example: What about parasites?) Work through the whole life cycle. 6. Change roles for each group and repeat the activity. 7. Ask the following questions: a. What would happen to natural enemies if there are no insect pests? b. Do you think insect pest s can be beneficial if at low populations? Why are they important? c. In the system, what will happen if you spray broad -spectrum pesticides? Toxic Compound (Pesticides) Related Issues: Poisons in Agriculture Introduction Pesticides are necessary to in some fields, in some years in areas. In many seasons, many rice fields do not need pesticides. Pesticides are poisons. They are very dangerous to both the person who uses the pesticides and to those that are living or playing near the fields where pesti cides are used. These poisons kill aquatic animals (fish and frogs), beneficial predators and parasites, and other beneficial animals such a pollinating bees. There is no use of pesticides that can be called "safe" to everything in the ecosystem. Even the very selective insecticide, Applaud, causes problems for the growth of shrimp and prawns. There is no "safe use of pesticides". We can only avoid their use and reduce exposure when used. Predators, parasites, pathogens, resistant varieties, growing a healt hy crop, and proper monitoring of the fields are methods to reduce the population growth of potentially harmful insects and rats. Pesticides are not the "last method" to use as commonly thought. They must be integrated with other aspects. Seed treatments a re a good example of how pesticides are used before other methods, but used in a way which reduces their impact on natural enemies, on the environment and human health. In general, pesticides should be used as a "last method" because they do have many bad effects and are expensive in terms of actual "out -of- pocket" costs. When pesticides are needed to reduce economic losses by insects, they should be used correctly and carefully. The first step is to know the area to be sprayed, and the proper amounts. Care should be taken in measurement and handling of pesticides. The second step is the actual application of sprays in the field. Proper protection is needed in field application and possible with simple adaptation. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 33 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Poisons in Agriculture: Health Aspects Introduction Pesticides are poisons which cause physiological changes that result in the death of insects and other organisms such as humans. Most pesticides attack the nervous system of organisms, both invertebrates (insects, spiders, etc.) and verte brates (fish, frogs, people, etc.). The carbamates and organophosphates both interfere with the correct transmission of nerve pulses. The action of interference can be the result of a high single dose (common in suicide by insecticides), or over a long per iod such as in farmers and children working and playing in fields with pesticide applications. How are the poisonous effects of insecticides measured? There are many types of studies done before a pesticide may become registered for general usage. Some of the tests are the effects of chemicals on skin, on eyesight, and on moist tissues such as lungs. There are also tests to see how much pesticide is needed to kill insects, and mammals. For most of these tests, rats and rabbits are used in large numbers. For example, insecticide is sprayed in the eyes of these animals and the reactions are noted. Test on the dosage of insecticide which kills test animals are called Lethal Dosage tests. Basically the process is simple and depends on the fact that not all anima ls will die with the same dosage because some individuals are more sensitive than others. If a very low dose is applied to 100 individuals, only a few individuals will die. If a very high dose is given, then most of the 100 individuals will die. The dose a t which 50 of the 100 (50%) die is called the 50% lethal dosage or LD50. The dosage at which 90 of the 100 individuals (90%) die is called the LD90. This is a moderately useful measure, except that even at low dosages there is still an LD10 in which 10% di e. What does this 10% probability mean in another example? It means that there is a probability that for every 10 people that cross the road, one will die while crossing the road. In other words, 10% probability is still very high. Dosage for mammal is usually measured in mg/kg. This means that a LD50 of 1 mg/kg (the oral LD50 for Temik) for a person who weighs 50 kg is about 50mg, which is a very small quantity. Lethal dosages are usually given in both oral (through the mouth) and dermal (exposure to skin) levels. But pesticides cause other effects besides death. Other symptoms of pesticide exposure include nausea, dizziness, headaches, fatigue, and diarrhea, irritation of nose, eyes, and throat. Recognition of these effects is an important part of pestici de safety and in your job as an IPM field expert. These and other effects of pesticide exposure will be explored in this activity with demonstration of pesticide effects on animals.   Natural enemies are usually more susceptible to insecticide that pests be cause natural enemies usually do not build up resistance. What happens when a low dosage is applied to the field (i.e. a dosage that is LD 50 for BPH, but LD 90 for natural enemies)? Poisoning Symptoms   Use the following list. Go through the list and check an y symptoms you have seen or about which farmers complain.   After spraying have you are had the following symptoms immediately or within a few days:   Mild symptoms   Irritation of eye, nose, or throat   Headache   Dizziness   Fatigue   Diarrhea   Moderate symptoms   Redn ess or itching skin   Upset stomach   Blurred vision   Extreme weakness   Excessive perspiration   Rapid heartbeat   Severe symptoms   Pinpoint pupils   Difficulty in breathing   Unconsciousness CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 34 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Effects on pesticide exposure. PESTICIDES A major problem of pesticides is their effect on "non -target organisms". Most pesticides are very toxic to predators, parasites, fish, and people who come into contact with these chemicals. For other types of insects there are other pesticides. A major new pesticide is Bacillus thurengi ensis usually called "Bt". This insecticide is active against most Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths). The insecticide must be consumed while most insecticides only need contact. Also the insect does not die as quickly after eating Bt than when sprayed by a broad spectrum insecticide. In this activity, we will look at a selective pesticide and compare with a typical broad spectrum pesticide. Objective Demonstrate the difference between selective and broad spectrum pesticides. Materials Plastic bags Spiders and caterpillars collected from the field Small fish, and plastic buckets Monocrotofos and Bacillus thurengiensis Cups, netting, rubber bands and sprayer Steps 1.Collect caterpillars, spiders and other natural enemies from the field. Keep the caterpil lars on soybean plants so that they don't die. The plants should have the roots so there are enough leaves for the insects to live on for two days. 2.Place the natural enemies in two cups and over with netting. 3.Place the caterpillars on the plants in cup s with water. Prepare two cups. 4.Place fish in two plastic containers. 5.Prepare monocrotofos in hand sprayers and Bt. in another hand sprayer. Use typical field dosage (1 -2 ml/I) 6.Spray one of the cups containing natural enemies with monocrotofos and on e cup containing enemies with Bt. 7.Spray one of the cups with caterpillars with monocrotofos and the other with Bt. 8.Spray one of the plastic containers of fish with monocrotofos, and one with Bt. 9.Observe the results after one hour and after one day. I f the larvae haven't died in one day, observe again after another day. Discussion questions 10. What are the results of the treatments? Prepare a table for presentation of results. 11.Why are selective pesticides useful for secondary crops? Why is it impo rtant to use selective pesticides? Carbofuran, Carbamate Spray and Spiders "Systemic" pesticides are those pesticides that are absorbed by the plant and the pesticide is able to move through the plant through the network of plant vessels. It is commonly s aid that systemic pesticides are safe for natural enemies because they compounds are in the soil and in the plant. But how do the pesticides finally get into the soil? Where is carbofuran broadcast? Is there any difference in the application of granular ca rbofuran and liquid sprays? In this activity we will look at the effect of carbofuran on spiders. The effect will be compared with a neutral control and a sprayed BPMC. Objective Demonstrate the effects of carbofuran on natural enemies. Time required = 1 20 minutes. Materials Plastic bags, 3 cups, netting for the cups, 3 rubber bands, water, carbofuran, liquid carbamate (eg. BPMC), natural enemies, hand sprayer (1 liter for indoor plants), pencil and paper. (Try also some herbicides, and fungicides). Procedure 1. Go to the field with plastic bags. Collect spiders and predatory beetles. 2. Return to a shady place. Set up three cups with the names "carbofuran", "carbamate", and "control" written on them. Add water so the cup is half -full. In the cup for "ca rbofuran" add a small amount (two pinches) of carbofuran to the water and mix so the carbofuran begins to be dissolved. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 35 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 3. Now in each of the cups, add the same number and same kind of natural enemies. Cover the cups with netting and rubber bands. 4. In th e cup labeled "carbamate", spray the inside with the hand sprayer. The concentration and dosage should be the same as in the field. 5. Watch all three cups for changes in activity or death of natural enemies. Record the time of activity changes and deaths over 45 minutes. 6. What happened? How did the natural enemies in the control compare with the other treatments? Why did natural enemies die in the carbofuran treatment? Do spiders and beetles walk on the water in the field? What is the significance of a b asal application of carbofuran? 7. Present your results and answers to the above questions to the other groups. Spraying Spraying pesticides is dangerous. The compounds used for spraying are in a concentrated form which makes them even more dangerous tha n usual exposure. Concentrated liquids direct from the bottle, and exposure to sprays in the field during application will cause numerous symptoms such as skin rashes, dizziness, nausea, and headaches. The usual recommendation for gloves, boots, rain cloth s, and respirator are impossible to implement for most farmers because of the cost. But all these articles can be substituted; plastic bags for gloves and boots, large plastic sheet cut like a rain poncho or apron, a hat and cloth for the nose and mouth. The direction and velocity of the wind should be considered when spraying. If the wind is blowing hard, do not spray! Your chemical will never reach most of the plant. Never walk into the wind when spraying. Always walk at a 90o angle to the wind. Remember that when you broadcast carbofuran in the water, you are walking in a soup of water and dissolved carbofuran. In this activity, you will see the result of spraying in the field. Objective Demonstrate simple adaptations to reduce exposure to poisons. Time required = 120 minutes. Materials: sprayer, bucket, red batik dye, white pants and shirt. Procedure (for group of five) 1. Go to the field. One person in the group should put on the white pants and shirt. Four other members should make notes on what the first person is doing. Note especially how to make reduce exposure to the spray liquid. 2. Fill the tank with water. Add red batik dye. Add a lot so that the water is very red. Close the tank and shake the tank to mix the water and dye. 3. Now spray 500 m eter square of the field with the tank of water. Others should measure the time required and observe the spraying. 4. After finished spraying, empty an excess spray. 5. Now observe the sprayer. Is the red dye on the skin or clothing of the person who spray ed? What could be done to reduce the exposure? What would happen to the person if the liquid was a real pesticide and the farmer used his regular spraying clothes? 6. Present you observations, discussion and clothing to the other groups. Discuss "Is there really 'safe application ' of pesticides?  Ice-Breakers, Energizers and Team Building Exercises   Ice Breakers   Energizers   Team fun   Team skills Introduction Facilitators should build up a repertoire of activities that can used for interesting opening that help participants to become comfortable with each other ("Ice Breakers"), activities that boost the energy level of the group after visiting the field or after a break ("Energizers"), activities that are just fun to do in groups and make getting together a better time ("Team Fun"), and activities that build team capacity through learning techniques for planning, organizing, and action ("Team Skills"). The term "Team" is used here to emphasize that a group need to work together with common goals for common int erests and that teams often have structure. There are coaches, captains, and players with various positions. No team can work well without each team member, and the team succeeds more often when everyone works together while each improves individual skills and commitment. During the cycle of the FFS over one season, energizers and team fun might be used more at the beginning of the season, with more emphasis on CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 36 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Team Skills near the end of the season, especially in preparation for community organizing. Remem ber that training should be enjoyable for the facilitator and FFS members. Ask members of the group to lead other activities like warming up exercises at the beginning of each meeting, or other activity that they may have learned at another training progra m. Ice Breakers   Introduce neighbor   Expectation picture   Throw a ball   Name memorization in circle   Money under chair   Air numbering Energizers   Coconut and other songs   Group words (boy - hmmm, girl - clap, cow - stomp)   Parasite (pen in bottle)   Ballons on leg   Number on paper (practice makes perfect)   20 questions   Give characteristics game Team Fun   Water passing   Broken squares   Strings Energizers   Mini -tower and bridge (leadership style)   Message passing (communication) Farmer Field School - Follow -up Activities The following is a short list of activities. The possibilities are numerous, but will require action on the part of facilitators and the group they get organized. Farmers' Planning Meetings are one step towards farmers determining what type of follow - up ac tivities is appropriate to their interest, time availability, and funding situation. The planning meeting should try to assess the common problems the members are facing, and establish goals towards which to work. Work plans and success criteria should als o be developed, although these will usually have to be undertaken at a second meeting established specifically for that purpose. Farmer to Farmer FFS Problem Specific Field Labs IPM Clubs: ARE to carry out follow -up activities. The Clubs usually focused on non -IPM problems, but often related to agriculture. Like many organizations, the name merely reflects its history and not its focus. The Clubs have officers, local budgets, and action plans. IPM Labeling of crops IPM Villages FFS that focus on developin g a block of IPM fields with lower pesticide inputs IPM Trainer Association: Trainers make a newsletter and sent it among themselves for reading and comparison of efforts with their self -proclaimed goal of training at least four FFS each year. Personal op inions and information, research results, and progress reports are included in the newsletter. "Entering Pesticide Free Zone" This would be a title displayed along the side of the road as one travels into an area where IPM has advanced to the point where pesticides have been replaced with non -pesticide plant protection methods, Training Evaluation There are numerous ways for a facilitator to evaluate the progress of one training season, but four methods that have been widely used are explained below. Ballot Box evaluations are field based methods that use real specimens and field situations to test field abilities. The Ballot Box test should be given before and after training with levels of difficulty that are the same. The questions on the test should be developed before the beginning of the season and relate to the core objectives of the course. Questions should focus on;   agronomic practices and plant compensation   recognition of pests, natural enemies, diseases   recognition of damage from pests, diseases , rats, and birds   management of pests, diseases, rats, and birds   other areas covered in the course The mechanism of the test is to write a question on a thick paper board and mount it on a stick in the field. Questions should be multiple choices. The board and stick are placed like a sign in the field next to a real condition or object that is being asked about in the question. For example: 1. What caused this damage? A) Stem borer B) Rats C) Tungro The sign should have a string connecting the sign to the plant part showing the damage. The participant will then mark A, B, C on the answer sheet for question one. Alternatively, each farmer is CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 37 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management given many small pieces of paper (Ballots) with the same number specific for him or her. On the small containers(ballo t box) marked A to C the farmer can put in their Ballots. If the correct answer is A, then the person puts their number in the A container. Twenty to thirty questions should be prepared for the test. After everyone has taken the test, the facilitator shoul d walk with the group to each question and determine the correct answer. If the question or answer is not clear, the group or facilitator may decide to discard the question. Written Exams can also be used together with the Ballot Box. Of course it is impor tant to consider the literacy level of the group, and the knowledge of names or technical terms. The names used in one village, may not be the officially accepted names nationally and this can lead to confusion. Written tests must be tested for clarity bef orehand, and checked to ensure local applicability. Remember that knowing the name of something is not important for field management, but knowing it's function and ecological attributes is important. Don't be academic about names. Also don't be academic a bout definitions. Be practical and keep tests focused on real issues, skills, and knowledge. Give the test before and after training. After the test, always review together to determine the correct answer. Discard unclear questions. Field Walks are the bes t evaluation method because there is time to clarify questions and answers. Field Walks are basically walking in the field in pairs (facilitator and farmer) with a predetermined list of questions. The facilitator should have already prepared questions, and know parts of the fields where the questions can be used. Questions will be similar to the Ballot Box. The list of questions should not change significantly between persons and from the beginning and end of training. A few do not do's also:   Do not use pi ctures (photographs or drawings).   Do not assume the name of something is the same everywhere.   Do not assume anyone knows the nationally accepted proper name.   Do not use Latin names whenever local names are available.   Do not assume your question is very cle ar (they never are!). Quality Checklist The following questions can be used to assist an observer in examining the quality of IPM training in all IPM training contexts. These questions identify the key points in an IPM activity that must be present if the quality of the process of training is to be maintained. While most of these questions can be answered by "yes" or "no", don't stop there. Explain why you answered "yes" or "no". This checklist can also be of used as an outline for reports on IPM training. "What's this?" 1. Are questions answered by further probing or leading questions? 2. Do probing questions concern functional relationships in the agro ecosystem? 3. Are participants able to define functional relationships in the agro ecosystem? Agro ecosy stem Activity 1. Before the activity begins are participants told the goal of the activity and the process to be followed in the activity? 2. During observation do participants get into the field? 3. Do participants look at all parts of the plant as part o f their observation activity? 4. Do participants note down what they find? 5. Do participants collect specimens? 6. Are observations summarized in the agro ecosystem drawings? 7. Does the leader pose problems, ask questions relevant to the drawings, or use the list of questions in the Field Guides to encourage participant analysis of the drawings? 8. Does discussion take place concerning field conditions? 9. Are "what if" scenarios posed by the leader and discussed by the participants? 10. Are previous week  s agro ecosystem drawings used for comparisons to the situation this week? 11. Are field management decisions taken and critically examined before acceptance? 12. Are other factors considered in addition to the economic threshold in decision making around control issues? 13. Are participants active and working together in the small groups? 14. Can participants state the difference between pests and natural enemies? 15. Are decisions based on levels of insect populations and analysis of their functional relationships in the rice field? 16. Does the leader, by means of questions, help the participants to analyze the activity and what they have learned? Special Topics 1. Before the activity does the leader explain the goal and process of the activity? 2. During the activity are participants involved and active? CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 38 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 3. Are group activities dominated by one individual? 4. Can participants present results stating or summarizing what has happened and why? 5. Can participants state what they have learned from the activ ity? 6. Does the leader ask open ended questions to: help participants examine what happened during the activity; generalize from the activity; apply what they learned to "real life"? Group Dynamics 1. Before activity does the leader tell participants the goal and process of the activity? 2. Are all participants involved in the activity? 3. Does the leader ask open ended questions to: help participants examine what happened during the activity; generalize from the activity; apply what they learned to "real life"? Ballot Box 1. Does the "ballot box" test field based knowledge? 2. "Ballot box" questions should not have Latin names, but are they still used? 3. Does the leader use the "ballot box" as a learning reinforcement tool by reviewing each item with th e participants? Evaluation of training impact   Economic benefits   Environment and health benefits   Community organization and self -funding Economic benefits The most sought after measures of FFS impact by those that paid for the FFS. The investment in training is usually expected to produce some political good will, but moreover, should increase economic benefits to the farmer and community, and eventually the nation. The major factors to be measured are inputs such as pesticides, time and labor, fertilize r, water use and equipment. Other benefits should also be considered such as higher rice prices for low or no spray crops that may be obtained with special labeling or improved soil fertility in cases where organic material is built up in the soil using IP M methods (green manure or compost). Such economic evaluations could be done on a seasonal or annual basis with IPM trained farmers to see long term impact. Environment and health benefits may accrue with implementation of IPM. Fewer pesticides and less to xic pesticides use is a common outcome of beginning field observation and IPM methods. Measuring these benefits is not easy; however, a few indicators may be used. For environment, the occurrence of more natural enemies, or other wild life may be considere d. For health, immediate benefits can be measured by counting such indicators as lost work days, stomachaches, headaches, visits to local clinics for post-pesticide treatment ills, and other common illness related to pesticide exposure. A baseline should b e made be measures before training at one season or more. It is important to separate crops: some farmers continue to spray heavily on some crops while reducing sprays. Community Organization and Self -Funding can also be evaluated, and is one of the impor tant goals of organizing the FFS through SLTP. Community organizations may continue to pursue IPM activities, but if the FFS group gets organized to take on other issues, like setting up of bio control lab through self funding, then the impact of the FFS will be much greater CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 39 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management (Annexure -I) Requirements of essential stationery and field materials for SLTP Sl.No. Materials Quantity 1 Colour chart papers 100 2 White news paper print roll 10 3 File covers 100 4 File tag(Bundles) 10 5 Xerox paper 10 bund les 6 Permanent marker pens 50 7 Sketch pen sets 20 8 OHP sheets 50 9 Foot scale 10 10 Micro tip pens 10 11 Punching machines 6 12 Staplers 6 13 Stamp pad 2 14 Cello tapes 12 15 Small thread balls 6 16 Needles 10 17 Scribbling pads 60 18 Ball pens 30 19 Fevisticks 10 20 Gum bottles 6 21 Plastic pouches 10 22 Rubber band bundles 10 23 Medium cotton rolls 10 24 Gem clip boxes 6 25 Drawing pin boxes 6 26 Colour film rolls 6 27 Chloroform 500 ml 6 28 Mosquito net cloth 20 meters. 29 29 Thermocol sheets 10 30 Bamboo sticks 200 (Annexure -II) Allocation of additional duties and responsibilities to resource persons Sl. No Designation Additional duties 1 General coordinator Providing transport to entire training activities Reception and i ntroduction of floating resource persons Bill settlement and correspondence 2 Technical coordinator Providing information on every day field activities Procurement, supply and mobilization of every day field materials to trainees and resource persons 3 Resource persons -! Looking after accommodation, food and refreshment Timely supply of food and refreshment 4 Resource person -II Taking care of class room facilities Arrangement of audio visual aids Daily attendance Duplication of training materials and d istribution 5 Resource person -III Recording daily training activities and submitting reports to General co - coordinator Co-coordinating with inauguration and valedictory committee 6 Resource person IV Providing medical and recreation facilities Arrangeme nts for photos. Video coverage of training activities 7 Resource person V Providing reception and accommodation to floating resource persons Attending to emergency activities arising during the training programme *Supporting staff will assist the resourc e persons. CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 40 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management (Annexure -III) Profile /Bio data of Participants Name Date of birth Qualifications Experience Present official address Phone number and address of participant controlling offer Home address Address and phone number of perso n to be contacted in the event of emergency Place: Date: Signature with date (Annexure -IV) Attendance sheet for participants Date: Sl.No Name Signature with date Counter signed: General Co -ordinator (Annexure -V) Attendance sheet for Resource persons Sl.No Name Signature with date Counter signed: General Co -ordinator Attendance sheet for supporting staff Annexure VI Sl.No Name Signature with date Counter signed: General Co -ordinator (Annexure -VII) Certificate for pa rticipants Certificate Model Government emblem Certificate This is to certify that Shri/Smt   .. has successfully completed the season long training programme in Cotton IPM progamme h eld at ------- ------- --------- --------- ---------- --------- -------------- from --------- ------------- to ---------- ------------- Plant Protection Advisor Government of India Director of Agriculture Government of ---------- -  .(Annexure -VIII) Certificate Model Certificate for Resource pers on Government emblem Certificate Shri/Smt           .. has participated has resource person in the season long training programme in Cotton IPM progamme held at ---------------------------------------------------- from - ------ --------- to ----------- ----------- ----------- Plant Protection Advisor Government of India Director of Agriculture Government of ---------- - (Annexure - IX) Certificate for Farmer for attending to FFS Farmers field school Certificate (in local language ) This is to certify that Shri/smt. ------------------------ Son/daughter of --------- --------- ----------- --------- Participated in the Farmers field school programme conducted during ------------- at --------------- village organized by ---------------- ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- Astt. Director of Agri. Government of ----------- Assistant Director/ Plant Protection Officer CIPMC ------------- CBG -IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 41 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Base line survey format for FFS Crop Season Year Sl.No Particulars 1 Name of the Farmer & Contact Number 2 Village :____Block:____ District:______ 3 Farm Area (In Hectares) Type of soil 4 Type of Irrigation :___ Crop & variety :_____ 5 Gross yield for 1 hectare (last cropping season) (in Kgs.) 6 Key Insect pests observed during last season 7 Minor insect pests observed during last season 8 Major Diseases observed during last season 9 Known natural enemies of crop 10 Cultural pest control practices adopted 11 Major pesticides used & against pests 12 Type of sprayer used 13 Size of sprayer(in litres) used 14 Any Bio -pesticide/Botanical spray used 15 Number of tank loads used per hectare 16 Number of spraying operations per cropping season 17 Granular pesticides used (Kg/ha) 18 Wettable powd ers used (Kg/ha.) 19 Seed rate used per ha 20 Do you use cocktail type of pesticide 21 Cost of seeds used per ha. 22 Cost of seedbed preparation 23 Cost of land preparation per ha. 24 Cost of transplanting per hectare 25 Irrigation cost per hecta re per cropping season 26 Labour costs for hand weeding/spraying of herbicide/day/hectare 27 Interest for crop loan/hectare 28 Fertilizer used No. of bags Cost of one bag Total cost 29 Labour cost for application of fertilizer /hectare 30 No. & cost of liquid pesticide (EC) used/ hectare 31 No. & cost of wettable powder used / hectare 32 No. & cost of granular pesticides used/ hectare 33 Labour cost for spraying of pesticides 34 Any other expenses incurred for plant protection measures 35 Rate of produce sold (price 36 Yield obtained 37 Profit (last season) Signature FFS in charge Season Long Training Programme Table of contents Sl. No Contents 1 Introduction 2 Objectives of SLTP 3 Components of SLTP 4 Major heads - expenditure fo r SLTP 5 Role of co -coordinators and resource persons during SLTP 6 Essential elements required for SLTP 7 SLTP field guide Principles of IPM Basic concepts and assumptions ETL vs. AESA Course contents 8 Significant activities of SLTP Crop physiology Agro-ecosystem analysis Participatory action research Special topics Non-Formal education Course evaluation 9 Activities in details Participatory action research experiments Classical IPM field studies. Weekly schedule FFS activities -Practice sessions Disease specimens and insect collections Crop physiology experiments Disease management Weeds management Population dynamics of rodents Insect zoo Life cycle and food webs Poison in agriculture Team building exercises FFS follow up activities Training evaluati on for participants Quality check list Self evaluation matrix for facilitators Training impact 10 Annexure (I to X) Annexure. I Essential stationary items required for SLTP Annexure . II Duties and responsibilities assigned to facilitators Annexure.III Profile of participants Annexure.IV Attendance sheet for participants Annexure . V Attendance sheet for resource persons Annexure.VI Attendance sheet for supporting staff Annexure . VII Certificate format for participants Annexure . VIII Certificate format for facilitators Annexure . IX certificate format for FFS farmers Annexure . X Base line survey format for FFS CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 42 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management CONSERVATION & AUGMENTATION OF BIO-CONTROL AGENTS Introduction: Eco-system consists of both biotic and abiotic factors which contribute to sustain the ecosystem. The optimum abiotic conditions help to survive the biotic fauna and flora in proper way in the ecosystem. Slight or extreme variations in the abiotic conditions lead adverse effect on the survival of existing flora and fauna of an ecosystem. Both natural and manmade interference in the ecosystem also put adverse impact on biotic components of ec osystem. Hence, for the better survival of flora and fauna it is very essential to maintain the abiotic and biotic factors better suited for their survival. Keeping in the view the above facts, the conservation of bio -control agents can be defined as follo ws-  To make environment better suited for bio - control agents or natural enemies of crop pests and weeds is called as conservation of bio -control agents   The removal of those cultural practices which are harmful for the buildup of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds (bio -control agents) is called as conservation of bio -control agents   To preserve, Protect and Promote the abundance of organisms that may keep the abundance of harmful organisms (pests) under check.  In ecosystem both biotic and abiotic factors are interdependent on each other even different biotic factors i.e fauna and flora are interdependent on each other. They also have competition among themselves in form of antibiosis and symbiosis. Parasitism, predation and hyper -parasitism are the means of their dependency hence, for the survival and conservation of bio -control agents there has to be safety devices from their hyper parasitoids or predators. A parasitoid and predator must be host specific as extent as possible and should not be affected with their hyper parasitoids prevailing in that particular area. Keeping in the view the above we must manipulate the habitat of bio -control agents through different means for the conservation of bio -control agents. Crop plants and their pests or crop pests and their natural enemies have adapted to each other over time in a process called co-evolution . The genetic diversity evolved by pests and their natural enemies through co -evolution is particularly complex because both are genetically variable over time and space, which eventually resulted into unsuccessful innundative or inoculative augmentation processes. The conservation of natural enemies including agro biodiversity in a small area within local environments help to ensure that the ongoing proces ses of evolution and adaptation of those beneficial insect pests to their environments are maintained within farming systems. This benefit is central to in situ conservation, as it is helpful as reservoir for further augmentation of already adapted parasit e, predators and entomo -pathogens over rest the field afterwards. Programmes to be implemented for the Conservation & Augmentation of bio -control agents: 1. Conducting fixed plot surveys through FFS to note the seasonal build up of pests & defenders (bio-control agents) . 2. Conducting trials for ecological engineering and habitat manipulation 3. Installation of conservation devices through conservation cages, bamboo cage, bird pearcher etc. 4. Wide publicity through hoarding, audio visuals etc. 5. Farmers education & HRD through Participatory Action Research (PAR) activities like field exercises on different aspects, insect zoo etc. 6. Conducting AESA in FFS fields. 7. Development & Strengthening of bio -control labs through Self Help Groups (SHG) 8. Capacity building of staf f Tools for conservation & augmentation of bio - control agents: 1. List of prevailing bio -control agents in a particular area 2. Albums for visual identification of bio control agents, diseases and weeds 3. Preparation of insect zoo 4. Conservation devices like conser vation cages, bamboo preacher, bird preachers etc. 5. To maintain in-situ bio-agent sanctuary by CIPMCs 6. Formats for observations CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 43 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Items required for conservation & augmentation kit: 1. Vehicle (4 wheel drive) with driver 2. Survey route map 3. Survey Performa 4. Pen or p encil, Eraser, Sharpener 5. Writing pad 6. GPS enabled Data logger 7. Collection vials with lid 8. Cotton 9. Rubber bands 10. Brush 11. Needle 12. Thread 13. Polythene bags 14. Aspirator 15. Sweeping / butterfly net 16. Watch glass 17. Hand lenses of different capacity 18. Chloroform 19. Killing bottle 20. Pruni ng knife 21. Spade 22. Khurpi 23. Mt. square/Quadrant 24. Kit bag 25. Hand Gloves 26. Gum boots/sleeper 27. Forceps 28. Scissors 29. Cloth 30. Muslin cloth 31. Field cap 32. Rain coat/Umbrella 33. Stapler with pins 34. Blotting paper 35. Herbarium press 36. Entomological pins 37. Plastic/polythene bags 38. Paper soap/liquid s oap 39. Torch with cell 40. First aid box with medicine 41. Blade 42. Drawing sheets 43. Sketch pens 44. Field camera 45. Mobile phone 46. Water bottle 47. Stick 48. Half pant 49. Field Apron/T -shirt 50. Measuring tape 51. Tags/Labels Some pests and their common natural enemies PESTS NATURAL ENEMIES Lacewings Lady bird beetles Parasitic flies Parasitic wasps Predatory mites Other groups and examples aphids       entomopathogenic fungi syrphid fly larvae caterpillars       Bacillus thuringiensis birds, pathogenic fungi and viruses, predaceous wasps, Trichogramma spp., spiders, predacious bugs. cottony cushion scale     vedalia beetle whitefly         Coccinellid beetls lace bugs       pirate bugs spiders mealy bugs         mealybug destroyer lady beetle psyllids       pirate bugs scales         Aphytis spp. (armored scale parasites) CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 44 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management slugs, snails   predaceous ground beetles vertebrates spider mites       sixspotted thrips Stethorus sp. (spider mite destroyer lady beetle) thrips     predatory thrips weevils, root or soil-dwelling Steinernema carpocapsae and Hetero rhabditis bacteriophora (entomopa thogenic nematodes), soil dwelling predatory beetles and other predators. * http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/p n74140.html Ways and Means of Conservation of Natural Enemies of Crop pests 1. Avoiding blanked sprays of Pesticides and adopting spot application as a last resort. 2. Replacing chemical pesticides with bio - pesticides. 3. Growing of Trap crops (attractant crops for natural enemies) and flow ering plants like dill, anise, spear mint, buck wheat, yarrow, white clover, tansy, cow pea, fennel, cosmos etc. 4. Intercropping with nectar rich plants like caraway, coriander, sunflower, parsley (ajwain) , mustard, marigold, carrot, alfalfa, corn flowering/ push -pull plants. 5. Installation of conservation cages or bamboo cages. 6. By growing the crops that provide Pollen and Honey dew to the natural enemies. 7. Augmenting the population from areas of abundance to the areas of absence. 8. Avoiding the trash burning wher e the abundance of Natural enemies is found. 9. By releasing proper strains of natural enemies timed with proper pest stage. 10. Promoting Non -chemical methods of Pest Management like bio -pesticides 11. Keeping a regular and strict surveillance Programme to note the buildup of population of Crop pests and their natural enemies. 12. By educating the Farmers  How to conserve the natural enemies in their crop fields  by way of demonstration. 13. By adopting P: D ratio and AESA. 14. Reduce the use of broad spectrum persistent pestic ides where ever possible. Use reduced risk pesticides. Avoid use of neonicotinoids and other chemicals which are highly/moderately toxic to honey bees in crops pollinated by honey bees. 15. Certain weeds in rice environment are infested with insects that alte rnatively support rice pest parasitoids in off -season. Nanophyes sp. on Ammania baccifera L. a weed in rice fields have been identified as a reservoir host supporting parasitoids like Neanastatus cinctiventris Girault on gall midge, Trichomalopsis sp. on Pelopidas mathias (Fabr.). Ammania baccifera 16. Intercropping of crop plants like mustard and linseed (alsi) etc. provide nectar to the parasitoids and support their population. 17. Efforts to educate farmers in recognizing natural enemies and the beneficial ro le played by them are important as the role played by the parasitoids remain unnoticed. Utilization conservation of natural enemies in situ in the rice ecology is the most practical option available for promotion of natural bio -control. 18. Birds are the effic ient predators of various insect pests. Efforts should be done to educate farmers about the role of predatory bird and their need in crop ecosystem. 19. Conserve spiders in field CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 45 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Conserve and Augment the following BC Agents Name of BC Agents Ways & Means of conservation Bracon sp . Braconides feed on honey dew, nectar or pollen; hence, the flower plants like Dill, Parsiety, Zinnia, Clover, Aalfa -alfa, Cosmos, and Sunflower may be grown on border or as intercrops to attract the native Braconides populatio n. Cotesia sp. By planting above flowering herbs Trichogramma Releases may be timed with presence of host egg stage in the field -Suitable strains must be release. -Continue the releases till the natural breeding is established. Epiricania melanoliuc a -Strict surveillance programme may be put in operation. - Avoid indiscriminate trash burning. -Augmenting in new area. -Avoiding Aerial spray of pesticides. Damsel bug (Nevid sp.) -Collect from the areas of high abundance and release them to the areas of absence. Damsel and Dragon fly Larvae found in water. Maintain watery condition around field by making a water channel. Ground beetle (Ophionia )/ Rove beetle/carabid beetle Strip mulching provides permanent pest and perennial planting. -Plant white c lover or Amaranths sp. as ground cover. Rove beetles (Staphylinid beetles ) and Ground Beetles( Carabid beetles ) * Conserve or develop refuges for soil dwelling rove beetles. This could be done by promoting plant diversity, using mulches and keeping stones , logs or other items that provide protection. Green lace wing (Chrysoperla sp.) Plant flowering plants such as Dill, Parsiety, Zinnia, Clover, Aalfa -alfa, Cosmos, Sunflower, Carrot, Dandelion as they are good source of pollen and Nectar for adults. Provide the source of water during dry season. Maintain perennial Lacewings plant like mango, Litchi etc. *Make sure flowers (e.g. dill, sunflower, carrots) are present in the field or close to the crop to ensure food supply for adult lacewings. Pop ulations can be maintained on a non -pest aphid species and other hosts outside crop area (in weedy areas on field margins). Lady bird beetle Avoid indiscriminate use of pesticides. Grow fodder crops like Barseem. Collect from the plants like Calotropis a nd release them in desired fields. *Ladybirds can be encouraged by growing non -crop plants which support aphid species which do not attack crops. Grow strips or groups of non - crop flowering plants such as fennel, thistles, coriander, carrots and/or milkwe ed. They can also be brought in by hand from outside the crop. Spraying with pesticides should be avoided wherever possible in order not to kill the ladybird adults and larvae but if it is necessary, selective pesticides and methods should be used. Spide r Mulching in strips. Avoid indiscriminate use of pesticides. Hover -flies *Hover flies can be encouraged by allowing non -crop plants to grow around fields - these support non -pest species of aphids that hover fly larvae can feed on. They are attracted to all flowering plants but especially to fennel, milkweed, sun hemp, flowering brassicas or wild mustard, thistles, sunflower, coriander and dill. In rape and kale, some of the previous crop can be left to flower (provided the pest and disease levels are low) or a small number of plants from the current crop can be encouraged to bolt and flower by stopping watering. Avoid spraying with pesticides whenever possible but if it is necessary, use selective CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 46 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management pesticides and methods. Predatory Ants * Excessive hoe ing or ploughing will destroy ant nests so farming systems which use minimum tillage (very little hoeing or ploughing) are more likely to encourage beneficial ants. Predatory thrips *Avoid use of broad spectrum pesticides. Parasitic flies *Provide su gar containing food sources for the adult such as flowers or honeydew. Encourage habitat diversity. Avoid spraying pesticides. When necessary select a product and application method that is less harmful to natural enemies. *Source: www.infonet -biovision. org BIO-CONTROL AGENTS OF DIFFERENT CORPS Sl. No. Name of Bio - Control Agents Crops Pests 1. Trichogramma chilonis Cotton Strain Cotton Bollworms 2. Trichogramma chilonis Sugarcane Strain Sugarcane / Rice Borers 3. Trichogramma exiguum Sugarcane Borers 4. T. minutum Sugarcane Borers 5. T. perkinsi Sugarcane Borers 6. T. faciatum Sugarcane Borers 7. T. brasilienses Cotton Bollworm 8. T. pretiosum Cotton Bollworm 9. T. embriophagum Apple Codling moth 10. T. coccai palladium Apple Codling moth 11. Trichogramma toidea spp. Rice/ vegetable Borers 12. Bracon hebetor Cotton/ gram/ vegetable Bollworm/ Pod borer/ fruit borer 13. Bracon brevicornis Cotton/ gram/ vegetable Bollworm / Pod borer / fruit borer 14. Bracon kirkpatricki Cotton / Bollworm / gram / vegetable Pod borer / fruit borer 15. Chelonus blackburni Cotton / gram / vegetable Bollworm / Pod borer / fruit borer 16. Chelonus kelliae Potato Potato tuber moth 17. Telenemus remus Cotton/soya bean Spodeptera litura 18. Apantelese flavipes Maize Stem borer 19. Sticholotis madagassa Sugarcane Scale insect 20. Lindorus lophanthae Sugarcane Scale insect 21. Chilocorus bijugus Apple / Citrus Scale insect 22. Pharoscymnus perniciosi Apple / Citrus Scale insect 23. Iceriya purchasii Citrus Scale insect 24. Encarsia perniciosi Apple Scale insect 25. Encarsia spp. Fruit / vegetable White Fly 26. Aphytis spp. Apple Scale insect 27. Pharoscymnus horni Sugarcane Scale insect 28. Aphidius spp. Mustard Aphid 29. Amblysius spp. Cotton / apple Mite 30. Aphelinus mali Apple Woolly aphis (Eriosoma lanigerum) 31. Neochetina eichhornai Water hyacinth Weed Weed 32. Neochetina bruchi Water hyacinth Weed Weed 33. Zygogramma bicolorata Parthenium weed Weed 34. DD-136 nematode Neo-aplectana carpocapsae Rice Borer 35. Paratheresia claripalpis Sugarcane Borer 36. Eucelatoria bryani Gram H. armigera 37. Chrysoperla scelestes Cotton Sucking pest / bollworm 38. Chrysoperla carnia Cotton Sucking pest / bollworm 39. NPV of H. Cotton / H. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 47 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management armigera Gram/ Vegetable armigera 40. NPV of spodoptera litura Cotton/ Soyabean/ vegetable Spodoptera litura 41. Sturmiopsis Sugarcane/ tomato / rice Borers 42. Tetrastichus spp. Rice Borers 43. Goniozus spp. Rice Leaf folder 44. Cryptolemus spp. Grape vein/ citrus / coffee Mealy bug 45. Scymnus spp. Grape vein/ citrus / coffee Mealy bug Natural enemies of crop pests in India Parasitoids HYMENOPTERA   Acerophagu s papayae Noyes & Schauff   Aenasius advena Compere   Aenasius bambawalei Haya t   Aenasius indicus (Narayanan & Subba Rao)   Allotropa sp.   Amitus spp.   Anagyrus agraensis Saraswat   Anagyrus loecki Noyes & Menezes   Anicetus ceroplastodis (Mani)   Aphanogmus fijiensis (Ferriere)   Apenesia sahyadrica Azevedo & Waichert   Blepyrus insularis (Cameron)   Bolangera sankarani Hayat & Noyes   Bracon brevicornis (Wesmael)   Bracon hebetor (Say)   Brachymeria n ephantidis Gahan   Callaspidia notata (Boyer de Fonscolombe)   Campoletis chlori deae Uchida   Cephaleta australiensis Howard   Cephaleta brunnive ntris Motschulsky   Charops bicolor (Szepligeti)   Chelonus blackburni Cameron   Comperiella indica Ayyar   Coccidoxenoides perminutus Girault   Coccophagus ceroplastae (Howard)   Coccophagus pseudococci Compere   Cotesia flavipes (Cameron)   Cotesia vestalis Haliday   Diaeretiella rapae (Mc'Intosh)   Diplazon laetatorius (Fabricius)   Dirhinus anthracia Walker   Distatrix papilionis (Viereck)   Elasmus spp.   Encarsia guadeloupae Viggiani   Encyrtus aurantii (Geoffroy)   Eriborus argenteopilosus ( Cameron)   Exoristobia philippinensis Ashmead   Goniozus nephantidis (Muesebeck)   Gryon fulviventre (Crawford)   Ischnojopp a luteator (Fabricius)   Isotima javensis (Rohwer)   Leptomastix dactylopii (Howard)   Marietta leopardina Motschulsky   Megastigmus viggianii Narendran & Sureshan   Meteoridea hutsoni (Nixon)   Neocharitopus orientalis (Agarwal)   Neodusmetia sangwani (Subba Rao)   Nesolynx thymus (Girault)   Oomyzus sokolowskii (Kurdjumov)   Plagiomerus bangaloriensis Shafee et al.   Podagrion spp.   Praleurocerus viridis (Agarwal)   Prochiloneurus aegyptiacus (Mercet)   Prochiloneurus albifuniculus Hayat et al.   Prochiloneurus pulchellus Silvestri   Promuscidea unfasciativentris Girault   Pseudleptomastix mexicana Noyes & Schauff   Quadrastichus mendeli Kim & La Salle   Scutellista caerulea (Fonscolombe)   Stenobracon deesae (Cameron)   Stenobracon nicevillei (Bingham)   Tetrastichus howardii (Olliff)   Tetrastichus schoenobii Ferriere   Theocolax elegans (Westwood)   Trichogrammatids   Trichopria sp.   Xanthopimpla stemmator (Thunberg) LEPIDOPTERA   Epiricania melanoleuca (Fletcher) DIPTERA   Halidaia luteicornis (Walker)   Peribaea orbata (Wiedemann) Insect Predators COLEOPTERA: COCCINELLIDAE   Anegleis cardoni (Weise)   Axinoscymnus puttarudriahi Kapur & Munshi   Brumoides suturalis (Fabricius)   Coelophora bissellat a Mulsant   Chilocorus circumdatus (Gyllenhal)   Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricius)   Cheilomenes sexmaculata (Fabricius)   Coccinella transversalis Fabricius   Coccinella septempunctata Linnaeus   Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant   Curinus coeruleus (Mulsant)   Harmonia dimidiata (Fabricius)   Harmonia eucharis (Mulsant)   Harmonia octomaculata (Fabricius )   Hippodamia variegata (Goeze)   Hyperaspis maindroni Sicard CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 48 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   Illeis cincta (Fabricius)   Megalocaria dilatata (Fabricius)   Nephus regularis Sicard   Pharoscymnus flexibilis (Mulsant)   Pharosc ymnus horni (Weise)   Rodolia amabilis Kapur   Rodolia fumida (Mulsant)   Scymnus castaneus Sicard   Scymnus coccivora Ramakrishna Ayyar   Scymnus nubilus Mulsant   Scymnus latemaculatus Motschulsky   Serangium parcesetosum Sicard   Synonycha grandis (Thunberg) COLEOPTERA: NITIDULIDAE   Cybocephalus spp. COLEOPTERA: STAPHYLINIDAE   Oligota sp.   Paederus fuscipes Curtis NEUROPTERA: CHRYSOPIDAE   Chrysopids NEUROPTERA: HEMEROBIIDAE   Micromus igorotus Banks   Micromus timidus Hagen HEMIPTERA: ANTHOCORIDAE   Blaptostethus p allescens Buchanan -White   Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius   Orius tantillus (Motschulsky)   Xylocoris flavipes (Reuter) HEMIPTERA: LYGAEIDAE   Geocoris sp. HEMIPTERA: PENTATOM IDAE   Andrallus spinidens (F.) HEMIPTERA: REDUVIIDAE   Isyndus heros (F.) DIPTERA: CHAMAEMY IIDAE   Leucopis sp. DIPTERA: CRYPTOCHAETIDAE   Cryptochaetum sp. DIPTERA: DRO SOPHILIDAE   Acletoxenus sp. nr. indicus Malloch   Cacoxenus (Gitonides) perspicax (Knab) DIPTERA: SYRPHIDAE   Dideopsis aegrota (Fabricius)   Ischiodon scutellaris (Fabricius)   Paragus serratus (F.)   Paragus yerburiensis Stuckenberg   Episyrphus balteatus (F.)   Eupeodes confrater (F.) LEPIDOPTERA: NOCTUIDAE   Coccidiphaga scitula (Rambur) LEPIDOPTERA: LYCAENIDAE   Spalgis epeus (Westwood) LEPIDOPTERA: PYRALIDAE   Dipha aphidivora (Meyrick) THYSANOPTERA: THRIPIDAE   Franklinothrips vespiformis Crawford Weed insects   Cecidochares connexa Mcquart   Cyrtobagous salviniae Calder & Sands   Neochetina eichhorniae Warner   Neochetina bruchi Hustac he   Orthogalumna terebrantis Wallwork   Pareuchaetes pseudoi nsulata (Rego -Barros)   Teleonemia scrupulosa Stal   Zygogramma bicolorata Pallis ter Invasive pests   Hypothenemus hampei Ferrari   Leptocybe invasa Kim & La S alle   Paracoccus marginatus Williams & Granara de Willink   Phenacoccus solenopsis Tinsley   Quadrastichus erythrin ae Kim Potential Invasives   Brontispa longissima Gestro (Source: National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Insect, Bangalore) Ecological Engineering for cons ervation of Bio - control agents To make the environment better suited for the buildup of existing beneficial fauna through manipulation of biotic and abiotic factors of ecosystem is called ecological engineer ing. Ecological engineer ing for conservation of bio- control agents is manipulation of the habitat in the crop ecosystem for buildup of beneficial bio -control agent. Ecological engineering is based on ecological principles in which the environment of Agro -eco- system is made suitable for the better survi val of bio-control agents/beneficial fauna. It s a kind of human intervention to manipulate the habitat better suited for the buildup of bio -control agents. For the better survival and build up of bio -control agents in Agro -eco-system, the following thing s are required: 1. Food in form of pollen and nectar for adult bio - control agents. 2. Shelters such as overwintering sites, moderate microclimate, etc. 3. Alternate hosts are required when primary hosts are not present. The knowledge about the following is requir ed for the habitat manipulation of pests and their Natural Enemies: 1. Food and habitat of the pests 2. Factors affecting the growth of pest build up. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 49 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 3. The time of infestation on crop by the pests and the time of development/ build up of bio -control agents for th e pest in the crop. 4. The pattern of the development of the pests and the level of causing economic damage. 5. The parasitoids, predators and pathogens of the particular crop pests. Ecological Engineering for pest management - Above ground: To fulfill the above requirement for habitat manipulation for making environment suitable for multiplication of beneficial fauna in an agro eco system, the inter -cropping, border -cropping and mix cropping of the flowering plants is required which provide nectar/ pollen as food for various bio-control agents and other beneficial fauna. Growing of alternate crops as a food for pests required for survival of beneficial fauna is another way of conservation and habitat manipulation. The trap crops and repelling crops for pests are a lso grown as intercrop along with the main crop. The following flowering crops are generally grown as trap/attractant under agro -ecological engineering: Cosmos, Sunflower, Okra, Hibiscus, Marigold, Fennel, Onion, Carrot, Coriender, Sesame, Chrysanthemum , T ridax, Mustard, Radish, Fagopurum, Ageratum, Alternanthera sp., Alfalfa etc. Ecological Engineering for pest management - Below ground:   Crop rotations with leguminous plants.   Keeping soils covered with vegetation and/or crop residue.   Adding organic matter i n the form of FYM, vermi -compost, crop residue   Reducing tillage intensity so that hibernating natural enemies can be saved.   Apply bio -fertilizers producing bio -agents.   Apply Mycorrhiza and Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobium (PGPR).   Apply Trichoderma and Pseu domonas fluorescence as seed, nursery treatment and soil application (if commercial products are used, check for label claim), However, bio -pesticides produced by farmers for own consumption in their fields, registration is not required. Photograp hs of Ecological engineering Demo Field Above mentioned photographs are sowing the demonstration of Ecological Engineering in cole crops conducted by the Directorate of plant protection, Quarantine & Storage during Krishi Vasant 2014 held from 09 -13 Feb, 2014 at CICR Nagpur. In this photograph the Cole crops were bordered by the Sunflower, Mustard, Marigold and Coriander crops. The Sunflower was the tallest crop to attract the Helicoverpa pest; it was surrounded by the two rows of mustard to attract Chryso perla and LBB. Coriander was an excellent crop for attract different natural enemies of main crop pets. Marigold crop was preferable crop for egg laying of Helicoverpa. It was observed that the cabbage and cauliflower crops found affected with aphid and th e aphid population on Cole crops was found parasitized by Aphidius , a potential parasite of aphid. This parasite could be able to manage the aphid population on Cole crops. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 50 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Recognizing Natural Enemies Proper identification of pests, and distinguish ing pests from their natural enemies, are essential to effectively using biological control. Pocket books, charts, albums, specimen boxes and live samples of crop specific pest & predators should be prepared and they should be displayed among farmers and extension officials so that one can easily recognize natural enemies. Encourage these natural enemies by avoiding pesticides that kill them; choosing plants that provide them pollen, nectar, and shelter; and keeping ants out of pest -infested plants. Common predators that eat garden pests are pictured below with bars showing their length. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 51 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Convergent lady beetle adults (left) and most reddish lady beetle species prefer aphids. Their larvae (right) prefer aphids but sometimes eat whiteflies and other sof t-bodied insects. Lady beetle eggs are oblong, widest in their middle, usually yellowish or orange, and can be laid in groups or individually. Syrphid fly larvae eat mostly aphids but also soft - bodied mealybugs, psyllids, and whiteflies. Green lacewing adults (left) eat nectar and pollen. Some species also eat insects. Lacewing larvae (right) feed on mites, egg s, and small insects, especially aphids. Green lacewing eggs are laid on slender stalks in groups (as shown here) or individually, depending on the species. Soldier beetle adults eat mostly aphids. Their soil - dwelling larvae eat beetle and moth eggs and larvae. Predaceous ground beetle adults (left) stalk soil -dwelling insects, such as cutworms and root maggots. Their larvae (right) live on soil and in litter, feeding on almost any invertebrate. Assassin bugs attack almost any insect. Pirate bugs attack mites and any tiny insect, especially thrips. Western predatory mites attack pest mites. Sixspotted thrips attack mostly mites. Spiders , including this crab spider, attack all types of insects. Praying mantids don t control pests, because they eat both beneficials and pests. Adults of predatory wasps , such as this paper wasp, prey on caterpillars and other insects. Syrphid fly (flower fly, hover fly) adults eat pollen and nectar and resemble honey bees and wasps. Adults act as good pollinator. Source:www.ipm.ucdavis.edu Cultural practices that affect natural enemies Tillage CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 52 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Tillage can have a major impact on soil organisms and on the relat ionships between organisms of different trophic levels. Tillage intensity, the method used, the frequency of tillage operations and the dates of crop planting and harvesting are all factors that can affect natural enemies. Generally, reduced tillage promot es a more stable environment, which in turn promotes a diversity of species. Less tillage is associated with greater abundance and diversity of the fauna. However, the effects vary from one species to another, depending on their specific ecological charact eristics. For example, species with a soil - dwelling larval or pupal stage are particularly sensitive to tillage. A study carried out with canola demonstrated that post -harvest tillage led to a reduction the next spring in the rate of emergence of parasitoi ds overwintering in the soil. Herbicides and pesticides use Numerous studies have demonstrated the negative effects of pesticides on natural enemy communities. The effects on predators and parasitoids can be direct (e.g. direct effects on their biologic al functions) or indirect (e.g. effects on their secondary resources) may be noticed. Nitrogen fertilization In addition to having an effect on pests, fertilization can also impact their natural enemies. Seeding and harvesting dates Seeding and harves ting dates could have an impact on both pests and natural enemy communities. Harvesting constitutes a massive disturbance which may have a greater impact on spiders than pesticide use. Practice IPM: Integrate the use of host -plant resistance, seed treatm ent, bio -pesticides, and green level pesticides to conserve natural enemies. Evaluate the potential for interference among control strategies and work towards ways that promote synergisms among the different aspects of crop production technology. Wise use of Insecticides: Insecticides are generally non -selective and kills the insects uniformly. It is, therefore, desired to select proper insecticide wisely by applying mind and use that judicially. Avoid indiscriminate trash burning: Indiscriminate trash burn ing should be avoided to conserve natural enemies of crop pests. Screening of hibernating parasites: Screening of hibernating parasites in the cotton bolls etc. and release them in the field may be done. Provide supplementary food: Provide supplementary food for the natural enemies or beneficial fauna like predatory ants. Spray dilutes sugar solution to provide food for the free living natural enemies adults. Provide neutral organisms as food to avoid cannibalism among predators. IDENTIFY THE BIO -CONTR OL AGENTS A. Spiders Araneus mitificus Thomisus sp. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 53 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Golden Orb Spider Saint Andrews Cross Chrysso argyrodiformis Cyclosa insulana Cyclosa insulana Leucauge venusta CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 54 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Lycosa Lynx spider Oxypes Green orb spider Widow spider Tetragnatha Spider Crab Spider Water Spider CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 55 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Goblin/Ant Spider B. Insect Predators Cicindela punctulata Bembidion quadrimaculat Lady bird beetle Chrysoperla carnea CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 56 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Damsel fly Dragon fly Water strider Xanthopimpla Cicindella spp. Geocoris tricolor Assassin bugs (Reduvius sp.) Syrphid fly larvae CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 57 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Anthocorid bug Praying mantis Meadow grass hopper Cryptolaemus montruzieri grub & Adult C. Parasitoids Trichogramma sp. CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 58 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Chelonus blackburni Apantel es sp. Bracon -hebetor Tetrasticus Epiricania melanoleuca Brachymeria Tachinid fly CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 59 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Goniozus spp Gonatocerus spp. Metopius sp. Trichospilus pupivora Aenasius bambawalei D. Entomopathogens Beauveria bassiana Metarhizium ani sopliae CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 60 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management NPV infected larvae AUGMENTATION OF NATURAL ENEMIES When resident natural enemies are insufficient, their populations can be increased (augmented) through the purchase /production and release of commercially available (laboratory breed) benefic ial species. Releases are unlikely to provide satisfactory pest control in most situations. Some marketed natural enemies are not effective. Two types of procedures are used to obtain reduction in pest population. These are: 1. Innundative releases: To s aturate the area through the regular and mass release of laboratory breed bio -control agents to get quick control of the pest. The regular releases of the bio -control agents are made throughout the crop season at regular interval without seeing the broods of the pests. The effectiveness of the bio -control agents can be judged by seeing the direct and indirect recovery trials. As experienced the weekly release of Trichogramma sp. @ 20,000 adults or parasitized eggs per Acre per week throughout the crop seaso n gives control of lepidopteron pests in Sugarcane, Cotton, Rice and vegetable crops. The release of Trichogramma is not recommended in case of gram crop as it is not working due to acidic nature of the crop. In such cases the larval parasites like Braconi d sp. may be augmented. Innundative release involves mass multiplication and periodic release of natural enemies when pest populations approach damaging levels. Natural enemies are not expected to reproduce and increase in numbers. Control is achieved thr ough the released individuals and additional releases are only made when pest populations approach damaging levels. 2. Inoculative releases: Inoculative releases are those, when the limited numbers of releases of bio - control agents are made timed with the presence of proper pest stage in the field. Thus we can say that Inoculative releases are those where large number of individuals are released only once during the season and natural enemies are expected to reproduce and increase its population for that growing season. Hence control is expected from the progeny and subsequent generations and not from the release itself. Examples of natural enemies used in mass releases Chrysoperla carnea : 8,000 -10,000 larvae/acre at 10-15 days intervals Trichogramma spp.:   Trichogramma chilonis @ 1,50,000/ha at 10-15 days intervals Epiricania melanoleuca : Field trials conducted by Dte. of PPQS have shown that in a problem area, field releases of 4000 -5000 cocoons and 4 -5 lakh eggs of E.melanoleuca per Ha where sugarcane Pyrilla incidence was noticed in the initial during July through proper surveillance, are likely to provide good control of Pyrilla pest CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 61 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Recommended doses of bio -control agents by NBAII Biocontrol Agent Stage supplied Systematic position Target pest Recommended dosage No. of releases Recommended PARASI TOIDS Trichogramma Chilonis Ishii (I) # Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae Sugarcane borers Chilo infuscatellus, Chilo sacchariphagus indicus, Chilo auricilius, Acigona steniellus; Cotton (Non Bt) bollworms Helicoverpa armigera, Pectinophora gossypiella & Earias spp.; Maize stem b orer Chilo partellus, Diamond back moth Plutella xylostella; Tomato fruit borer Helicoverpa armigera 50,000/ha on sugarcane and vegetables; 100,000/ha on maize and 1,50,000/ha on cotton Sugarcane: 4 to 6 releases at 10 days intervals for early shoot borer; 8 to 10 releases for stalk, internode and Gurdaspur borers Cotton ( Non Bt) & Vegetables: Six we ekly releases Maize: Three releases at five days intervals Trichogramma japonicum (I) Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae Top shoot borer of sugarcane Scirpophaga excerptalis and Paddy stem borer Scirpophaga incertulas Sugarcane & Paddy: 50,000/ha Sugarcane: 4 to 6 releases at 10 days intervals on observing pest or from 60th day Paddy: 6 releases on appearance of pest or from 30th day after transplantation Trichogramma achaeae (I)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae Cotton (Non Bt) bollworms and Bhendi Borer 1,50,000/ha on cotton (Non Bt) 50,000/ha on vegetables Six releases at weekly intervals Trichogramma pretiosum (E)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammati dae Tomato fruit borer Helicoverpa armigera 50,000/ha Six releases at weekly intervals on appearance of pest or from 45th day from transplantation Trichogramma embryophagum (E)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammati dae Apple Codling moth Cydia pomonella 2000 adults per tree or 100,000/ha Releases starting from the first moth catch, continue at weekly intervals till pest egg availability in the field CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 62 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Trichogramma dendrolimi Matsumara (E)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammati dae Targeted against tissue borers on maize and sugarcane - - Trichogramma brassicae (E)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammati dae Diamondback moth Plutella xylostella and Cabbage butterfly Pieris brassicae on cabbage and cauliflower 100,000/ha Six releases at weekly intervals Trichogrammatoi dea bactrae (E)* Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatid ae Diamond back moth Plutella xylostella on cabbage 2,50,000/ha Five releases at weekly intervals Telenomus remus Nixon (E) Parasitised egg cards Hymenoptera: Scelionidae Tobacco caterpillar Spodoptera litura 1 lakh /ha Three to four Releases Goniozus nephantidis (Muesebeck) (I) Cocoons Hymenoptera: Bethylidae Coconut black- headed caterpillar Opisina arenosella 10 adults per palm Four releases Chelonus blackburnii Cameron (E)* Adults Hymenoptera: Braconidae Potato tuber moth Phthorimaea operculella 50000 adults /ha in the field 2 adults per kg of potatoes in godowns Two releases at weekly intervals Three to four releases (or as per nee d) at fortnightly intervals PREDATORS Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant (E) Adults/ Grubs Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Mealy bugs Maconellicoccus hirsutus, Planococcus citri, P. lilacinus 10 beetles or 50 grubs /infested plant or tree or 5000 beetles/ha One or more releases based on pest intensity Scymnus coccivora (Ramakrishn a Ayyar) (I) Adults Coleoptera: Coccinellida e Mealy bugs on citrus, grapes and other fruit crops (M. hirsutus, Planococcus spp. 600   2500 adults/ha One or more releases based on pest intensity CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 63 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricius) (I) Adults / Eggs Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Sugarcane scale insect Melanaspis glomerata Citrus scale Aonidiella aurantii 1500 beetles/ha; or 10 egg pads (with 40 eggs p er pad) in 100 spots/ha (40,000 eggs/ha)10 adults/tree One or more releases based on pest intensity Cheilomenes sexmaculata Fabricius (I)* Adults / Eggs Coleopte ra: Coccinellidae Aphis craccivora on legumes a nd Lipaphis erysimi on oilseed crops 5000 larvae or 500 adults per ha Two releases; first release to coincide with the appearance of aphids Coccinella septempunctata Linnaeus (I)* Adults / Eggs Coleopte ra: Coccinellidae Aphis craccivora on legumes and Lipaphis e rysimi on oilseed crops 5000 larvae or 500 adults per ha Two releases; first release to coincide w ith the appearance of aphids Brumoides suturalis (Fabricius) (I)* Adults Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Aphids and white flies - - Curinus coeruleus Mulsant (E) Adults Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Subabul psyllid Hetropsylla cubana 20 Adults per tree Two releases during July and October Chrysoperla carnea (Stephen s) (I) Eggs / First instar larvae Neuroptera: Chrysopidae Sucking pests on cotton, tobacco, sunflower, groundnut& some fruit crops 10,000 first instar larvae/ha Twice during the season with an interval of 15 days On fruit crops, 10   20 larvae per infested tree Mallada spp. (I) * Cocoons Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Sucking pests on cotton, tobacco, sunflower, groundnut& some fruit crops 10,000 first instar larvae/ha Twice during the season with an interval of 15 days On fruit crops, 10   20 larvae per infested tree Ischiodon scutellaris (Fabricius) (I) * Cocoons Diptera: Syrphidae Aphis craccivora on legumes and Lipaphis e rysimi on oilseed crops 5000 larvae/ha - CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 64 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Micromus timidus (Hagen) (I) * Larvae Neuroptera: Hemerobiidae A. craccivora on legumes & oilseeds & Sugarcane Woolly Aphid Research in progress Research in progress Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius (I) Adults/ Nymphs Hemiptera: Anthocoridae Opisina arenosella Coconut black- headed caterpillar 50 nymphs/adults per tree Three releases Blaptostethus pallescens Poppius (I) Adults/ Nymphs Hemiptera: Anthocoridae Spider mites on bhendi 5 to 10 nymphs per p lant Five releases # Sugarcane, Cotton and Vegetable strains of T. chilonis maintained; I: Indigenous; E: Exotic Tips for Augmentation of Bio -control agents: 1. Always release ferrate adults (newly emerg ing adults) of parasitoids in the field. Release eggs/nymphs/grubs/adults of insect predators as the case may be. 2. Releases must be made in early morning or in evening hours. 3. Do not release long stored in fridge (over frozen) parasitized eggs. 4. Always see th e percentage of parasitization on Trichocard before release. 5. Always release the Trichocard ensuring their safety with rain and wind conditions (adverse weather conditions). 6. Attempt larval parasites along with the egg parasites for augmentation to get the d esired result. 7. Ensure quality of bio -control agents to be released. 8. Procure parasites from authentic source. 9. Develop field level technology for mass multiplication of bio -control agents. 10. Transfer/transport bio -control agents in ice boxes to avoid the emerg ence of adults on the way before releasing them in the field. 11. Crop specific strains of parasitoids should be released to get the desired control. 12. Indigenous bio -control agents are found more effective than exotic one. 13. Restrict/prevent movement of ants by b anding with pesticide on tree trunks in orchards before releasing insect predators of mealy bugs. 14. Provide sufficient food for the insect predators in packages during transport before field release in order to prevent cannibalism. Farmers can augment the nu mber of natural enemies by bringing them from the field. for example, ladybird beetles or parasitized aphids/larvae/egg masses which contain young parasitoids. Information on Bio -control agents against insect pests Common name Concept of active ingredien t in the formulation Target organism /host Method of application Recommende d dose & mode of application Reason for recommendation Acerophagus papayae Endoparasitoids of papaya mealybug On papaya mealybug Paracoccus marginatus Field release 250 per ha To reduce mealybug infestation Anagyrus loecki Endoparasitoids of papaya mealybug On papaya mealybug Paracoccus marginatus Field release 250 per ha To reduce mealybug infestation CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 65 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Pseudleptom astyx mexicana Endoparasitoids of papaya mealybug On papaya mealybug Paracoccus marginatus Field release 250 per ha To reduce mealybug infestation Trichogramm a chilonis Ishii (I) # Hymenoptera: Trichogramm atidae Parasitised egg cards Sugarcane borers Chilo infuscate llus, Chilo sacchariphagus indicus, Chilo auricilius, Acigona steniellus; Cotton (Non Bt) bollworms Helicoverpa armigera, Pectinophora gossypiella & Earias spp.; Maize stem borer Chilo partellus, Diamond back moth Plutella xylostella; Tomato fruit borer Helicoverpa armigera Field release 50,000/ha on sugarcane and vegetables; 100,000/ha on maize and 1,50,000/ha on cotton Sugarcane : 4 to 6 releases at 10 days intervals for early shoot borer; 8 to 10 releases for stalk, internode and Gurdaspur borers Cotton (Non Bt) & Vegetables: Six weekly releases Maize: Three releases at five days intervals Trichogramm a japonicum (I) Hymenoptera: Trichogramm atidae Parasitised egg cards Top shoot borer of sugarcane Scirpophaga excerptalis and Paddy stem borer Scirpophaga incertulas Field release Sugarcane & Paddy: 50,000/ha Sugarcane: 4 to 6 releases at 10 days intervals on observing pest or from 60th day Paddy: 6 releases on appearance of pest or from 30th day after transplantation T. achaeae (I)* Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae Parasitise d egg cards Cotton (Non Bt) bollworms and Bhendi Borer Field release 1,50,000/ha on cotton (Non Bt) 50,000/ha on vegetables Six releases at weekly intervals Trichogramma pretiosum (E)* Hymen optera: Trichogrammati dae Parasitised egg cards Tomato fruit borer Helicoverpa armigera Field release 50,000 /ha Six releases at weekly intervals on appearance of pest or from 45th day from transplatation Trichogramm a embryophagu m (E)* Hymen optera: Trichogramma tidae Parasitised egg cards Apple Codling moth Cydia pomonella Field release 2000 adults per tree or 100,000/ha Releases starting from the first moth catch, continue at weekly intervals till pest egg availability in the field Trichogramma Parasitised egg Diamondback Field release 100,000 Six releases CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 66 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management brassicae (E)* Hymenoptera: Trichogrammati dae cards moth Plutella xylostella and Cabbage butterfly Pieris brassicae on cabbage and cauliflower /ha at weekly intervals Trichogramm atoidea bactrae (E)* Hymenoptera: Trichogramma tidae Parasitised egg cards Diamond back moth Plutella xylostella on cabbage Field release 2,50,000 /ha Five releases at weekly intervals Telenomus remus Nixon (E) Hymenoptera: Scelionidae Parasitised egg cards Tobacco caterpillar Spodoptera litura Field release 1 lakh /ha Three to four releases Goniozus nephantidis (Muesebeck) (I) Hymenoptera: Bethylid Cocoons Coconut black - headed caterpillar Opisina arenosella Field release on tree trunks 10 adults per palm Four releases Chelonus blackburnii Cameron (E)* Hymenoptera: Braconidae Adults Potato tuber moth Phthorimaea operculella Field release 50000 adults /ha in the field 2 adults per kg of potatoes in godowns Two releases at weekly intervals Three to four releases (or as per need) at fortnightly intervals Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant (E) Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Adults / Grubs Mealy bugs Maconellicocc us hirsutus, Plano coccus citri, P. lilacinus Field release 10 beetles or 50 grubs /infested plant or tree or 5000 beetles/ha One or more releases based on pest intensity Scymnus coccivora (Ramakrishna Ayyar) (I) Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Adults Mealy bug s on citrus, grapes and other fruit crops (M. hirsutus, Planococcus spp. Field release 600   2500 adults/ha One or more releases based on pest intensity Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricius) (I) Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Adults / Eggs Sugarcane sc ale insect Melanaspis glomerata Citrus scale Aonidiella aurantii Field release 1500 beetles/ha; or 10 egg pads (with 40 eggs per pad) in 100 spots/ha (40,000 eggs/ha) 10 adults/tree One or more releases based on pest intensity Cheilomenes sexm aculata Fabricius (I)* Coleoptera: Adults / Eggs Aphis craccivora on legumes and Lipaphis Field release 5000 larvae or 500 adults per ha Two releases; first release to coincide with the appearance CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 67 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Coccinellidae erysimi on oilseed crops of ap hids Coccinella septempunctat a Linnaeus (I)* Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Adults / Eggs Aphis craccivora on legumes and Lipaphis erysimi on oilseed crops Field release 5000 larvae or 500 adults per ha Two releases; first release to coincide with the appearance of aphids Curinus coeruleus Mulsant (E) Coleoptera: Coccinellidae Adults Subabul psyllid Hetropsylla cubana Field release 20 Adults per tree Two releases during July and October Chrysoperla carnea (Stephens) (I) Coleop tera: Coccinellidae Eggs / First instar larvae Sucking pests on cotton, tobacco, sunflower, groundnut& some fruit crops Field release 10,000 first instar larvae/ha Twice during the season with an interval of 15 days On fruit crops, 10   20 lar vae per infested tree Mallada spp. (I) * Neuroptera: Chrysopidae Cocoons Sucking pests on cotton, tobacco, sunflower, groundnut& some fruit crops Field release 10,000 first instar larvae/ha Twice during the season with an interval of 15 days On fruit crops, 10   20 larvae per infested tree Ischiodon scutellaris (Fabricius) (I) * Diptera: Syrphidae Cocoons Aphis craccivora on legumes and Lipaphis erysimi on oilseed crops Field release 5000 larvae/ha One or more releases based on pest intensity Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius (I) Hemiptera: Anthocoridae Adults/Nymphs Opisina arenosella Coconut black - headed caterpillar Field release 50 nymphs/adu lts per tree Three releases Blaptostethus pallescens Poppius (I) Hemipter a: Anthocoridae Adults/Nymphs Spider mites on bhendi Field release 5 to 10 nymphs per plant Five releases Heterorhabditis indica (Entomo pathogenic nematodes) Infective juveniles in wettable powder White grubs, Root weevils & soil pests Soil Application 20k g/ha For combating Soil insect pests and reducing chemical insecticide usage Bacillus thuringiensis Bt crystals and Bt spores 5% Lepidopteran, coleopteran and dipteran pests of crops Foliar spray 1kg/ha To reduce the use of chemical pesticides Spodoptera litura Poly hedral bodies of the Spodoptera litura Foliar spray 250 Larval Equivalent To reduce the use of CBG -IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 68 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Nuclear Polyhedrosis virus(Sl NPV) NPV Virus 1 X 109PIB/ml (LE) /ha chemical pesticides Helicoverpa armigera Nuclear Polyhdrosis virus(Ha NPV) Poly hedral bodies of the NPV Virus 1 X 109PIB/ml Helicoverpa armigera Foliar spray 250 Larval Equivalent (LE) /ha To reduce the use of chemical pesticides Beauveria bassiana Spore cum mycelia formulation 1X108 CFU/g/ml Several insect pests of crops 2.5-5.0kg/ hafor foliar spray 2.5-5.0 kg+250 -500kg FYM /ha for soil application For combating insect pests and reducing chemical insecticide usage Metarhizium anisopl iae -do- -do- -do- -do- -do- Verticillium lecanii -do- Sucking pests of various crops Foliar spray 2.5-5.0kg/ hafor foliar spray -do- Paecilomyces fumosoroseus -do- For mite control -do- 2.5-5.0kg/ hafor foliar spray -do- CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 69 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) For Pests Surveillance & Monitoring Process to find the target pests in the surveyed area is expressed as surveillance and the methods to find the target pests is monitoring. Hence by monitoring of pests one can perform surveillance. Surveillance is the constant, systematic watch of biotic and abiotic factors of the crop ecosystem in order to predict the pest outbreak. In pest surveillance programmes one studies the population dynamics and the key natural mortality factors operating under field conditions which help in devising the appropriate management strategies. (Close watch=   ). It is observing something for a long period of time Pest surveillance implies close and regular vigilance over the development of   insect -pest population   disease   weeds, and   bio-control agents Whereas Survey is conducted to study the abundance of a pest species. The survey conducted over a defined period of time and detailed inspection to determine the characteristics of a pest population or which pest species occur in an are a is called as pest survey. AGENCIES TO BE INVOLVED FOR SURVEILLANCE:   State Department of Agriculture / Horticulture   State Agricultural Universities.   Indian Council of Agricultural Research Institute.   Crop based Directorates of Department of Agricultu re and Co -operation of Government of India. AIMS & OBJECTIVES OF SURVEILLANCE In general, Survey/Surveillance is of two types: 1. General Pest Surveillance (Crop Specific) 2. Specific Pest Surveillance (Pest Specific) Crop pests surveys are conducted to monitor the pest population on different crops in the area and t o generate field data of -   Ecology   Epidemiology of major pest and diseases   Reaction of crop variety   Estimation of crop losses   Status of pest & diseases   Role of Bio-control agents WHY TO CONDUCT PEST SURVEILLANCE: Pest Surveillance is under taken for the following purposes: - 1. To monitor and forewarn the crop pests, diseases, weeds, and Bio -control agents population buildup in the agricultural crops. 2. To monitor th e locust population in the Scheduled Desert Area (SDA) of Rajasthan and Gujarat States of India. 3. To know the occurrence of pests and provide basis for pest identification, listing of pest, pest status, pest categorization, to conduct risk analysis and to e armark the pest prone and pest free areas as a pre -requisite for phyto - sanitary measures and agreement for global trade. ADVANTAGES OF SURVEILLANCE   to know existing and new species in an area   to assess pest population and damage at different growth stage of crop   to assess natural enemies population and their build up at different growth stage of crop   to study the influence of weather parameters on pests & their natural enemies   to study pest status change on a particular crop   to assess abundance of na tural enemies and their influence on pests   to evaluate effect of new cropping pattern and varieties on pest   to determine pest trends affecting agricultural management practice   to alert growers and other agriculture professionals to the presence of plant p ests and outbreaks. INSECT FORECASTING MAY SERVE AS - To predict the forthcoming infestation level of pest CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 70 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management - To find out the critical stage at which management practices should apply OUTCOME OF THE SURVEILLANCE ACTION: The surveillance programme i s beneficial for: - 1. Early detection of pest occurrence, outbreaks, upsurges 2. For making suitable pest management strategy before the pest causes the economic loss. 3. For adopting timely pest management measures. 4. For earmarking the endemic, hot spots and pest free areas. 5. For making forewarning and issuing of timely advisory to farmers and State Governments. 6. For managing the pest emergencies. 7. For knowing the emerging pest problems. 8. For checking further spread of the pest in the other areas. 9. 10.For adopting pro -active steps for expected pest problems. TYPES OF SURVEY: - Qualitative survey : Useful for detection of pest - Quantitative survey : Useful for enumeration of pest i.e. numerically abundance of pest population in time and space - Fixed Plot Survey : In this programme cultivated area is divided into four sectors with the help of officer -in- charge of the area. All sectors should be of equal size. Each of these sectors must be accessible by road and properly shown in a map, showing number of vil lages in each sector. Each sector should have 3 observational fields of about an acre area. Each field should be at least a mile apart from each other. Thus there will be in all 12 observational fields with each technical observer. Every field cultivator m ust be personally contacted by the technical observer to seek his co -operation that is going to happen while making observations in those fields. Each observer is required to pay two visits to each of his observation fields per week and survey and sample t he pest and natural enemies  population in accordance with sampling methods. An acre plot may be divided into 5 - micro plots of meter square area one each in four corners (6 -100 meters away from bund) and fifth in the centre. Periodical assessment is done in these chosen micro plots. Agro -ecological parameters have also to be noted. Each technical observer will fill the field card (See model ann -I&II) each time he makes trip to his fields. A note book should be along with him to note down any details which cannot be accommodated in the field cards and should be designated as  Comments . He should report to his in -charge on weekly basis. Report thus prepared should be submitted to his in - charge who in turn will sent it to State Plant Protection Authority, Di rectorate Head quarters and state Research Units. These plots are to be kept free from chemical sprays till Economic Threshold Level (ETL) is reached. Roving Survey: Roving Survey is performed by assessing pest population/ damage wherein pest informatio n is gathered from randomly selected spots over large area in a short period. The survey routes to be finalized before the commencement of the seasons (Kharif/ Rabi) in consultations with state department of agricultural officials. The survey routes should cover major crops grown in the state. The survey team should be finalized before onset of surveillance programmes. The time interval between surveys should be at least a minimum of ten days. The survey should spread over in the entire crop season. The sur vey report finalized and sent to Head quarters and to concerned district head of state Departments through fastest mode. Wherever forewarning is required to be issued, it should be done on the same day during survey period. A minimum of 200 -250 Kms is cov ered in a day. Observations are done at least at every ten kilometer distance and on both sides of the road. The observation is performed after entering at least 100 mts inside the fields. Single Point Survey ( Eye ball method of survey): A qualified plant Pathologist traverses through the cropped area, halts at periodic intervals to inspect crop health and record all observations. This method helps to understand the immediate course of action needed to maintain crop health. Multiple point survey: This is conducted at different crop growth stages and enables to identify major production constraints and predict yields. Such methodically collected data for a few crop seasons through CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 71 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management regular surveys provide necessary information in developing disease m anagement strategies. ELECTRONIC -PEST SURVEILLANCE THROUGH HAND HELD DEVICE: The foundation of electronic pest surveillance primarily is based upon to collect, store, access, capture and transfer pest information to all concerned. This helps the delivery of data through fastest mode. The e - surveillance targets the critical requirements of a crop cycle, i.e. pest management. The collection of crop data manually is laborious and at the same time takes a lot of time to transfer from field to the decision ma king authorities. This methodology provides the required solution. It is estimated that the timely intervention in the crops may reduce the crop losses as much as 25 -30 percent.   The hand Held Device (Data Logger) is an important field data capture system (qualitative), quantitative with Geo -referencing.   The device has inbuilt Global Positioning System (GPS) so that geo -referenced field data can be collected.   At the end of the pest surveillance the device would generate a data file which can be easily transferred through Internet to centralized database for Analysis and transferring data into usable report.   The project was taken up in couple of states and is being pursued by the Directorate to be implemented through the CIPMCs. Data Transmitting & Stor age System   dacnet/pdmis System : It is a system on pest observations, at district level; the system runs at state level and a subset of the data is also visible at national level (crop, crop stage, pest, extent of disease/infestation); the source, and principal user, is State departments of agriculture, and it is also used to manage pesticide availability   http://dacnet/iipm System: It is a system to support entry of the results of roving survey reports, and includes the potential to report a more complete view with Agro Ecosystem Analysis (additionally numbers of pests, predators, field conditions, weather, etc) and is designed to administer CIPMC roving survey data PEST SURVEILLANCE AND ADVISORY SYSTEM IN INDIA National Pest Surveillance and Advisory Unit. It is composed of 1. Joint Se cretary (Plant Protection), DAC, Chairman 2. ADG (PP), ICAR , Member 3. Plant Pro tection Advisor, Dte of PPQ & S, Member Convener 4. Director, NCIPM (ICAR), Member 5. Representatives of crop specific ICAR Institutions   Invited by the Committee 6. Representatives of St ate Agriculture Universities   Nominated by the Committee 7. Selected Commissione rs/ Director of Agriculture -Depending on the season and crop 8. Representatives of NIC 9. Representatives of farmers - Nominated by the Committee Functions :   Coordinating pest surveillance and providing guidance to the CIPMCs and States   Analysis of pest surveillance data and advice on emerging pest threats   Enabling the research Institutes for taking up special and time bound activities in special areas   Launching campaign for creating farmer awareness on specific situations where community action is required   Advising the neighb oring States on possible pest migration. State Pest Surveillance and Advisory Unit   Commissioners/ Director, State Department of Agriculture - Chairman   Director of Research, State Agriculture University   Plant protection experts from State Agriculture Unive rsity   Representatives of ICAR Research Institute in the State   Selected District Joint Directors depending on crop season and area   Representatives of CIPMC of the State   Coordinator of KVK in the State   Farmers representatives   Selected NGO active in plant protection areas   Joint Director/ Deputy Director (PP) - Member Convener Functions:   Direct State -wide multi -district surveillance activities and manage the data   Arranging training of personnel and extend support for district level surveillance   Analyze repo rts on the pest and disease situation district wise CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 72 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   Log all issued advisories and ensure that advisories and other activities are consistent with guidance given   Confirm issuing of any State -wise advisories prepared by SAU, if needed   Arrange special surveys or surveillance depending on the need DISTRICT PEST SURVEILLANCE AND ADVISORY UNIT   Joint Director (Agriculture/ Horticulture) - Chairman   Representatives of KVK   Representatives of local research institute of SAU and/or ICAR   Block Agriculture Officers depe nding on the season and crop   Representatives of farmers groups   Assistant Director/ Deputy Director (PP) - Member Convener Functions:   Direct and coordinate local arrangements / activities on pest and disease surveillance and review results and draft appropriate advisories   Arrange to send the data to State and National units   Communicating the advisories to farmers through mass media and print media   Taking up special campaigns for surveillance and pest control practices   Involving the farmers groups, com modity groups, NGOs in surveillance and special campaigns. Survey/Surveillance for Assessment of Insect Population 1. Stage of the pest & natural enemies to be counted. (Egg, Larva, Pupa, Adults) 2. Actual process of counting Sampling - Distribution of pest - Percent infection/infestation - Count in number - Availability of natural enemies - Weather parameter - Variety is Susceptible or resistant Factors affecting insect pest population 1. Climate   Temperature   Relative humidity   Rainfall   Day length 2. Migration: Locust swarm etc. 3. Crop variety - HYV= are more susceptible for particular pests, consider them 4. Agronomic practices - spacing, planting date, nitrogen application SAMPLING A. Sample: A set of unit or portion of aggregated material which repr esents the whole population. Sampling helps     Identifying & monitoring pests & natural enemies   Understanding biological & environmental factors that affect pests & natural enemies   Using treatment threshold for control decisions   Knowing efficacy of contr ol tactics & impact on non -target pests & natural enemies Sampling patterns:   Zigzag pattern - Sampling a fallow field or one with no obvious symptoms in the current crop to see the incidence - viral, wilt   Square pattern - Sampling within the drip line of trees and shrubs   Star pattern - Sampling from a damaged area.   At random pattern - Through the square (1m x 1m) in field (4 -5 points) CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 73 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management ITEMS REQUIRED FOR SURVEY & SURVEILLANCE IN THE KIT : 1. Vehicle (4 wheel drive) with driver 2. Survey route map 3. Survey Proforma 4. Pen or pencil, Eraser, Sharpener 5. Writing pad 6. Collection vials with lid 7. Cotton 8. Rubber bands 9. Brush 10. Needle 11. Thread 12. Polythene bags , Butter bapers 13. Sweeping / butterfly net 14. Watch glass 15. Hand lenses of different capacity 16. Chloroform 17. Killing bottle 18. Pruning knife 19. Spade 20. Khurpi/ Spade 21. Meter square/Quadrant 22. Kit bag 23. Hand Gloves 24. Gum boots/sleeper 25. Forceps 26. Scissors 27. Cloth 28. Muslin cloth 29. Field cap 30. Rain coat/Umbrella 31. Stapler with pins 32. Blotting paper 33. Herbarium press 34. Entomological pins 35. Paper soap/liquid soap 36. Torch with cell 37. First aid box with medicine s 38. Blade 39. Drawing sheets 40. Sketch pens 41. Field camera 42. Mobile phone 43. Water bottle 44. Stick 45. Half pant 46. Field Apron/T -shirt 47. Measuring tape 48. Tags/Labels 49. Drain Spades 50. Scoop SAMPLING METHODS: 1. NET SWEEPING 2. SUDDEN TRAPPING 3. LIGHT TRAPS 4. SUCTION TRAP 5. ADHESIVE OR STICKY TRAPS 6. BAIT TRAPS 7. PHEROMONE TRAPS 8. WATER PAN METHOD 9. CROP SAMPLES 10. PIT FALL TRAP 11. PLANT SHAKE METHOD SQUARE METER: In the sampling techniques, the square meter has been very often referred to for sampling of various insect - pests - diseases and weeds. It is a square, formed of four one meter long and about a quarter cm thick iron wire firmly fastened at the corners to be thrown in the observation field for random sampling. It should be sufficiently firm and rigid in maintaining the square shape to stand field use. NET SWEEPING The points to be considered   time of sampling   density and height of the crop   number of sweeps required   the type of insect pest involved in the study. A sweep net is an important ite m in the sampling and the collection kit. It must be rigidly constructed and handled with care. A standard sweep net is 15 inches diameter loop, 24 inches long bag made of muslin coarse cloth, and a sturdy 40 inches long handle. A sidewise sweep will col lect more insects than an upward or downward sweep and at the same time there will be less injury to the insects. Swing the net the way in which the pendulum of a clock swings. One sweep is equal to 1 pass of the net, and the return pass is counted as the second sweep. The number of sweeps required to sample an insect is relative to the population level but the data should be reported as number of insects per sweep. Usually ten sweeps may be sufficient to assess the general population LIGHT TRAPS This meth od is useful in the quantitative estimation of seasonal abundance of several species of many moths and other insects which are attracted to light. The brood emergence of the rice stem borer Scirpophaga incurtulas is fixed by light trap catches. SUCTION TRAP CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 74 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management In this method the flying insects are trapped by sucking air in to some form of trap with a suction apparatus operated either by hand or by means of a motor. With timing mechanism it is possible to have hourly catches. ADHESIVE OR STICKY TRAPS A suitable persistent adhesive material like grease, tar etc. which will not dry out is spread on strips of paper and supported on a cylinder. Such sticky traps are set in fields and flying insects are trapped in them. The factors like wind velocity, tempera ture, colour of the trap etc. have a bearing on the number of insects caught in such traps. It is also necessary to collect and clean the traps often, otherwise the efficiency of the trap may go down. BAIT TRAPS   Many materials varying from raw plant materials and crushed insects to refined chemicals attractants which stimulate sexual odors or food odors are known to attract insects. These materials are used as baits in special types of traps made for the purpose depending on the insect species to be trapped.   Insects (termite)   Snails (Metaldehyde)   Rats (Zinc phosphide, Bromadiolone) WATER PAN METHOD In this method a wide mouthed plastic container is used with water. Few drops of detergent or teepol is added t o reduce the surface tension and for easy settling of insects at the bottom of the container. The plastic container with water is taken to the bottom of rice plant and the hills are tapped three times enabling the insects etc to fall inside the pan. It is repeated in ten different hills and the insects thus collected are be separated out as pests and defenders. This method is useful for the insects which feed at the basal portion of rice plant. PLANT SHAKE METHOD   A white paper is kept underneath the plant and shaking of the branches is done.   The insects falling from the plant are identified and sampled. What to record on data sheet?   Season   Crop   Variety/Hybrid name   DOS/DOT   Stage   Period   Date   Weather condition   Name of the farmer   Soil condition   Soil Typ e   Previous history (if any)   Previous crop   Pests and bio -agents observed (its stage, count per unit)   Diseases   Weeds   Rodent infestation B. DISEASE ASSESSMENT   Determination / measurement of plant disease incidence or intensity Objectives   For taking up timely management practices   To assess disease resistance   To assess crop losses Incidence   No. of plant units infected and expressed as percentage to total units examined, e.g. wilt Severity   Area of plant tissue affected and expressed as percentage to to tal units examined CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 75 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management DISEASE ASSESSMENT KEYS: C. SAMPLING FOR NEMATODES Sampling and extracting of nematodes serves two purposes   Diagnosis a current problem   Predict a future problem Sampling can be carried out at random or systematically. Depends on kind of plant: 1- Soil sampling 2- Plant sampling Soil Sampling Prior to sampling a field plot may be divided into strips or blocks   Systematic at equally -spaced point according (Zigzag manner)   At equally -spaced points along a line running diagonally across a field (crossing the field at middle)   Sample tree crops on alternate sides of the trunks and include feeder roots Sampling pattern:   If plants are not present, sample in the row   If plants are present, sample just outside the row   Take 4-5 cores to make a composite soil samples CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 76 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management   Collect sample from: *roots *leaves *stems * buds & flowers * fruits *seeds   Timing: *at seedling * flowering * fruiting *maturation stage Material for sampling   Never uproot plants or tak e soil samples by hand   Soil sampling tube (15 -20 cm)   Soil auger (more than20 cm)   Spade or garden trowel   Label each sample directly on the bag with a permanent marker, including field location, date, tillage history and rainfall to -date.   Don t leave bagged samples out in the sun. If necessary, store in a cool, dry place.   Pack samples in a cooler for transport or an insulated box for shipping.   Speed is essential   ship as soon as possible. D. RODENTS SURVEY - Sighting the actual damage/loss - Live burrow counts - Census baiting - Trapping LIVE BURROW INDEX   Plug all burrows in the evening hours.   Observe and count the next morning reopened burrows per unit area (called as live/active burrows)   Burrow index: 0-25/ha : low 25-50/ha: Moderate 50 & above: High E. ESTIMATION OF WEEDS: Visual estimation is followed by taking quick look at the entire field to have an idea of weeds in different parts of the field. Also vigour and growth of main crop and the weeds are taken. Emphasis must be given on an unbias ed estimate. This survey can be combined with the other crop pest - diseases survey. Samples must be taken away from the main roads. At least 3 -10 samples should be taken for an hectare area. The samples should be taken with the help of 1m x 1m quadrant. We eds must be identified, counted, recorded in proforma. Unidentified weeds should be collected preserved for further action. Broad leaved, grasses, sedges etc are accordingly separated. The field sampling technique for weeds: To understand the impact of weeds on a habitat, weed infestations can be sampled and possibly mapped. To manage the weeds, sampling and mapping give valuable information on what IPM tactics will be used and when to use. The goal of sampling is to get an accurate estimation of the potential weed population in a CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 77 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management given area. The sampling technique must adequately represent the whole area. For example, in a field, do not just sample on the edge of the field because this would give you an inaccurate estimate of what is going on in the whole field. Mapping of where exactly the weeds are may allow you to spot treat rather than do something on the whole field. Your goal in sampling must be understanding of the species composition of an area or gaining information in order to make managem ent decisions. The type of sampling used will depend on what you want to know and what environment you are sampling in. For example, for farm situations, there are established "economic thresholds" of tolerance for weeds. Above that level, the weeds will c ost the farmer money if he does not do something to knock them back. Learning Objectives:   Try and compare sampling techniques for weeds   Learn plant identification   Learn factors involved in management decisions based on sampling information   Discover the c oncepts of species diversity and distribution within habitats Materials Needed:   paper and/or data sheets   long tape measures to set up transects   meter square   weed identification books or charts   hand lens   zip lock bags if specimens are to be brought back for identification Timeline: Depends upon how in -depth study has to done. Whether several class periods, or partial or all day field activity. Procedures: 1- Select several locations where sampling of weeds has to be done. 2- Lay out a transect across the env ironment and predetermine at what distance intervals one will stop and sample. 3- Transect method - at each predetermined point on the transect, stop and write down the plant species touching or closest to each side of the tape at the stopping point. Do this until all points are sampled. 4- Quadrat square method - go back and stop again at the same points. This time, set the corner of the quadrat square down at the stopping point parallel to the tape. Inside the square, see how many different plant species you ca n find. List them. Make an estimate of what percent of the ground within the quadrat is covered by each of the species. Determine if the plant species are evenly distributed or clumped. Data collection: Transect method - list species found at each interval as described above. You can also take measurements like plant height, stage of growth or other factors that are relevant in that habitat. Quadrat method - list all plant species found inside quadrate with % cover IDENTIFICATION OF DISEASES, PESTS, WEEDS, NATURAL ENEMIES IN DIFFERENT CROPS Insect -Pests of Paddy Thrips (Nymph & Adult) Green Leaf Hopper Rice case worm symptom & its larvae CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 78 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Paddy stem borer attack & its egg mass Swarming Caterpillar (L,P,A) Rice Skipper symptoms, its larvae & Adult Gall Midge short horned grass hopper Rice leaf folder symptoms its larvae & adult) Rice Hispa symptoms, its larvae & adult BPH WBPH Mealy bug Gundhi bug Whorl maggot (A,L) Diseases of Paddy Sheath blight Bacterial blight Rice Blast sheath rot Tungro Major weeds of paddy crop CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 79 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Echinochloa colona Echinochloa glabrescens Echinochloa crusgalli Ageratum conyzoides Amaranthus spinosus Fimbristylis miliaceae Cyperus difformis Cyperus iria Pests & Diseases of cotton Jassid Aphid White fly Thrips Mealy Bug American bollworm Pink bollworm Spotted bollworm Spodoptera . litura Semi looper Black arm wilt Damping off Alternaria leaf spot Anthracnose Cercospora leaf spot CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 80 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Grey Mildew Leaf curl Root knot Sting nematode Wheat diseases and pests Yellow rust Karnal bunt Brown rust Common bunt Fusarium head blight Loose smut Bacterial streak Powdery mildew wheat aphid Annexure -I RICE SURVEY FIELD CARD (MODEL) Survey routes: (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) State:_____________________________ Reporter s:_________________ Date:__________ I - Location Details Field & Mile stone no. Remarks Village Block District II   General Information * CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 81 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management * Use following codes for recording general information Variety: Local (1); Hybrid (2) Planting Method : Broadcasting (1); Transplanting (2) Variety DOS/DOT Crop stage Crop Appearance Water Weather Weeds Deficiency III - Pests** Leaf Folder Stem Borer Rice Hispa Green Leaf Hopper Gall Midge Case worm Grasshopper BPH WBPH Whorl maggot Others 1 2 3 Rats Live burrows (number) IV- Defenders: *** Spiders Coccinellids Damsel/Dragon fly Carabid Staphylinid Mirid bug Tetrastichus Egg parasites Telenomus Bracon Ichneumonids Pathogens Others 1 2 3 V- Diseases** Sheath blight Sheath rot Rice blast False smut Brown spot Bacterial blight Tungro Others 1 2 3 CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 82 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Crop Stage: Seedling (1); Tillering (2) ; Booting (3) ; Heading (4) ; Flowering (5) ; Milky (6) ; Dough (7) ; Matured (8) Crop appearance : Healthy (1) ; Yellowing (2) ; Browning (3) ; Dead (4) Water : Flooded (1) ; Muddy (2) ; Dry (3) Weather : Sunny (1) : Cloudy (2) ; Drizzle (3) ; Rainy (4) Weeds: Low (1); Moder ate (2); Heavy (3) ** Observe 20 plants diagonally across the field and record the pests/diseases and BCA ( Bio -control agents) by using following scales: 0 Nil; Low (L) - < 5 % damage; Moderate (M) - 5-10 % Damage; severe (S) > 10% Damage *** Use following scale for reco rding defenders: 0 - Nil; 1 - Low ; 2 - Moderate ; 3 - Abundant Annexure -II SUGARCANE SURVEY FIELD CARD (MODEL) Survey routes: (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) State:_____________________________ Repo rters:_ __________ Date:_______ I - Location Details Field & Mile stone no. Remarks Village Block District II   General Information * Variety DOS/DOT Crop stage Crop Appearance Water Weather Weeds Deficiency III - Pests** Pyrilla Shoot Borer(Early/Top etc) Stem borer White fly Aphids Black Bug Mites Scale Termites / White grub Mealy Bug Black bug CBG -IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 83 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Others 1 2 3 Rats Live burrows (no.) * Use following codes for recording general information Variety : Local (1) ; Hybrid (2) ; Crop Stage : Seedling (1) ; Tillering (2) ; Cane Formation (3) ; Maturity (4) Crop apearance : Healthy (1) ; Yellowing (2) ; Water : Flooded (1) ; Muddy (2) ; Dry (3) Weather : Sunny (1) : Cloudy (2) ; Drizzle (3) ; Rainy (4) Weeds : Low (1) ; Moderate (2) ; Heavy (3) ** Observe randomly the field and record the pests/diseases & BCA(Bio -control agents) by using scal es: 0 Nil; Low (L) - < 5 % damage; Moderate (M) - 5-10 % Damage; severe (S) > 10% Damage *** Use following scale for recording defenders: 0 - Nil; 1 - Low ; 2 - Moderate ; 3 - Abundant Tetrastichus Egg parasites Telenomus Bracon Ichneumonids Pathogens Others 1 2 3 4 V- Diseases** Red Rot Leaf Spot Grassy shoot Leaf blight Mosaic Scald Whip smut Others 1 2 3 4 IV- Defenders: *** Spiders Coccinellids Damsel/Dragonfly Carabid Staphylinid Mirid bug CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 84 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management WEED ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 1. Introduction Weed is a plant growing where it is not desired . Weed is an unwanted plant in a specific crop ecosystem . Weeds are the serious pest and a major impediment in production of field crops through their ability to com pete for resources viz. Nutrients, light, space, water , air and their adverse impact on product quality. The losses due to weed infestation vary from crop to crop and depend mainly on type of weed species and their intensity. According to an estimate the losses due to weeds account nearly one third i.e.33%, diseases 26%, insects 20%, storage pest 7%, rodents 6% and other pests 8% of total crop losses1. Weeds are responsible for heavy yield losses to almost every important agricultural crop to the extent of complete crop loss under extreme conditions. In India increased agricultural productivity is needed to meet the increasing needs of the growing population. Proper weed management technologies , if adopted can result in an additional crop production. As the weed problems are multi - pronged, a holistic multi -disciplinary integrated approach would be imperative. In this context, integrated weed management (IWM) may provide a more sustainable crop production by combating weed menace effectively, economically and ecologically . Weeds are harmful in many ways, such as :   Reduction in crop yield and production efficiency,   Reduce produce quality,   Adversely affect the soil productivity   Weeds harbour insect pests and diseases,   Obstruct the flow of water in irrigation channels and field s,   Contamination of water bodies,   Menace to human and animal health ,   Damage to industry and public utilities,   Deterioration of aesthetics, and   Reduction in farmer s  income . 2. Classification of Weeds 2.1 According to Life Cycle: 2.1.1 Annual Weeds: They complete their life cycle within one year or one season. a) Rainy Annuals : They appear with the onset of monsoon (June -July) and complete their life cycle before rainy season is over (Oct /Nov) e.g. Barnyard grass ( Echinochloa crusgalli, E. colonum ), False daisy ( Eclipta alba ), Crab grass ( Digit aria sanguinallis ) etc. Echinochloa colona2 Echinochloa crusgalli3 Eclipta alba4 b) Winter Annuals: They complete their life cycle during winter season (Oct/Nov to Feb) e.g., Lambsquarter ( Chenopodium album ), Yellow sweet clover ( Melilotus indica ), Canary grass ( Phalaris CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 85 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management minor ), Blue grass ( Poa annua ), Sorrels ( Rumex crispus ) etc. c) Summer Annuals: They complete their life cycle during summer season (March to June), majority of the Kharif sea son weeds grow during summer season in irrigated farming e.g., Spurge (Euphorbia hirta), Pig weed (Amaranthus viridis) etc. d) Ephemerals: The short -lived annual weeds are called ephemerals e.g., Stonebreaker ( Phyllanthus niruri ). These weed completes thei r life cycle within a very short period of 2 to 4 weeks. 2.1.2 Biennial Weeds: They take at least two years or two seasons to complete their life cycle. They complete their vegetative growth in first year or season and produce flowers and seeds in the nex t year or season. e.g., Wild carrot ( Daucas carota ), Bold -leaf launaeae ( Launaea nudicaulis ) etc. 2.1.3 Perennial Weeds: They grow continuously for more than two years or several years. Perennial weeds are further classified as. 2.1.3.1 According to Root Syste m: Depending upon the depth of root system perennial weeds are classified as a. Shallow Rooted Perennials: Weeds having about 20 to 30 cm deep root system are called shallow rooted perennial weeds. e.g., Bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon ), Quack grass ( Agropy ron repens ). b. Deep Rooted Perennials: Weeds having about one meter or more deep root system. e.g. Nutgrass (Cyperus rotundus ), Johnson grass ( Sorghum holepense ), Acacia spp ., wild ber etc. 2.1.3.2 According to Mode of Reproduction: a. Simple Perennia ls: Weeds which are reproduced mostly by seeds: e.g, Lantana camara , Acacia sp p., Zizyphus spp . etc. b. Bulbous Perennials: Weeds which are propagated by underground parts like bulbs/ rhizomes/ tubers as well a s by seeds e.g., Purple Nut sedge ( Cyperus rot undus ), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense ) etc. c. Creeping Perennials: These weeds are s pread by lateral extension of the creeping above ground stem or roots or by seeds. e.g., Cynodon dactylon , Oxalis latifolia etc. Digitaria sanguinalis5 Chenopo dium album8 Euphorbia hirta6 Amaranthus viridis7 CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 86 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 2.2. According to the Habitat: Depending upon the place of their occurrence they can be grouped as under: 2.2.1 Weeds of cropped lands: e.g. Phalaris minor , Chenopodium album , Echinochloa crusgalli , etc. 2.2.2 Weeds of Pastures and grazing lands: e.g., Parthenium hysterophorus , Cleome viscose etc. 2.2.3 Non -Crop Land weeds: Parthenium hysterophorus , Lantana camera , Cannabis sativa etc. 2.2.4 Aquatic Weeds: e.g. Eichhornia crassipes , Salvinia sp. etc. 2.2.5 Plantation Weeds: Cynodon dactylon , Parthenium hysterophorus etc. 2.2.6 Lawn and garden weeds: Tridex procumbence etc. 2.2.7 Orchard and vineyard weeds: Digiteria sanguinalis , Cynodon dactylon etc. Several weed species overlap in the above class ification. 2.3 According to Nature of Stem: 2.3.1 Woody Weeds: These are the woody and semi -woody rough stem shrubs and are collectively called bush weeds, e.g., Acacia, wild ber, Lantana etc. 2.3.2 Herbaceous Weeds: These weeds have green and succulent st em and commonly occur on farm lands. e.g., Cock s Comb, Spurge, Carrot grass etc. 2.4 According to Association: 2.4.1 Season bound weeds: These weeds grow in a specific season in a year irrespective of the crop species cultivated. Some summer annuals or winter annuals are the examples of season bound weeds. In case of perennials, the period of their vegetative growth is taken as their growing season e.g. Johnson grass is a summer perennial weed whereas Creeping thistle is a winter perennial weed. 2.4.2 Crop bound weeds : Those weeds which usually parasitized the host crop e.g., Dodder (Cascuta campestris ), Broomrape ( Orobanche aegyptiaca ) and Witch weed ( Striga angustifolia ) etc. 2.4.3 Crop associated weeds : These weeds are also crop specific but for di fferent reasons, either due to requirement of specific micro -climate. e.g., Cychorium intybus and Coronopus didymus grown better in shady, cool and moist habitat of lucern and barseem etc. or due to mimicry e.g., wild rice in paddy fields and wild oat in w heat crop etc. Many of these weeds adjust by ripening before the harvest of main crop. 2.4.4 Contamination of crop seed by weed seed : Many weeds mature at the ripening time of crop and contaminate the crop seeds e.g. Phalaris minor seeds in wheat seeds etc . Also some weed seeds Phalaris minor9 Melilotus indica10 Poa annua11 Rumex dentatus12 CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 87 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Phyllanthus niruri13 Wild carrot ( Daucas carota )14 Launaea nudicaulis15 Cynodon dactylon16 Agropyron repens17 Also some weed seeds like wil d onion and wild garlic contaminates onion and garlic seeds, respectively, due to their resemblance. 2.5 According to the Origin of Weeds: 2.5.1 Introduced/ Exotic / Alien Weeds/Anthrophytes: Many weeds move from the place of their origin by seeds or ot her parts to a new area and establish there and become introduces weeds and are called Alien or Anthrophytes . 1. Carrot grass ( Parthenium hysterophorus)   U.S.A. 2. Silver leaf nightshade ( Solanu melaeagnifolium) - North America 3. Lantana (Lantana camera) : Central America 4. Cockleber ( Xanthium strumarium ): America 5. Broomrape ( Orobanche spp.) - Europe 6. Nutgrass ( Cyperus rotundus ): Eurasia 7. Water hyacinth ( Eichhornia crassipes)   Tropical America 8. Johnson grass ( Sorghum helepense )-Asia and southern E urope 9. Puncture vine ( Tribulu sterrestris )- Southern Europe 10. Western Ragweed ( Ambrosia psilostachya) - North America 2.5.2 Indigenous Weeds: Origin of majority of tropical weeds has been India e.g., Cock s comb, Spurge, Bermuda grass, Amaranthus spp . etc. 2.6 Facultative and Obligate Weeds: Weeds which grow primarily in undistributed or close communities but may sometimes escape to the cultivated fields are facultative weeds. It is also called Apophytes e.g., Cactus. Whereas, w eeds which grow or occur primarily in cultivated field where the land is distributed frequently are known as obligate weeds. e.g., Field bind weed (Convolvulus arvensis ). 2.7 Noxious Weeds: The weeds which are undesirable, troublesome and difficult to control are CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 88 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management called noxious we eds e.g. Nut grass, Bermuda grass, Carrot grass, Striga, Orobanche, Water hyacinth etc. 2.8 Objectionable Weeds: Weeds which produce seeds that are difficult to separate once mixed with crop seeds are called objectionable weeds e.g., mixture of Maxican pop py (Argemone Mexicana) seeds in mustard and wild onion ( Asphodelus tenuifolius ) in cultivated onion etc. 2.9 Industrials Weeds: Weeds invading areas around buildings, highway, railway lines, fence rows, electric and telephone pole bases etc. are called ind ustrial weeds e.g., Parthenium hysterophorus, Cynodon dactylon, Digiteria sanguinalis etc. Cyperus rotundus18 Sorghum halepense19 Lantana camera20 Oxalis latifolia21 Cleome viscose22 Eichhornia crassipes23 Salvinia molesta24 CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 89 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Circium arvense25 Imperata cylindrica26 Saccharum spontaneum27 Cuscuta campestris28 Orobanche aegyptiaca29 Striga angustifolia 30 Argimone maxicana Convolvulus arvensis31 CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 90 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management Parthenium hysterophorus Cassia tora Achyranthes aspera32 Ambrosia psylostechia a. plant and b. infested plantation crops in Tumkur district of Karnataka, India (Source: CIPMC, Bengaluru) 2.10 Poisonous Weeds: Some weed plants are poisonous /allergic etc. e.g. Parthenium hysterophorus , Poison ivy (Rhuss sp.) etc. 3. Weed Ecology: Weed Ecology is the interrelationship between weed and their environment. It is concerned with growth characteristics and adaptations that enable weeds to survive the changes in the environment. The environment includes climatic, ed aphic and biotic factors and it determines the distribution, prevalence, competing ability, behaviour and survival of the weeds. Persistence of a weed is largely influenced by climatic, edaphic (soil) and biotic factors which affect its occurrence, abundan ce, range and distribution. 3.1 Climatic factors: The important climatic factors of the environment that affect persistence of weeds are light, temperature, rainfall, wind and humidity. Light intensity, quality and duration are important in influencing the g rowth, reproduction and distribution of weeds. Photoperiod governs flowering and time of seed setting and maturation and also has impact on the evolution of various ecotypes within a weed species. Soil temperature affects seed germination and dormancy whi ch is a major survival mechanism of weeds. The winter survival of underground parts (rhizomes, bulbs, tubers and roots) of perennial CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 91 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management weeds is very much dependant on their resistance to extreme temperature s in the soil. Rainfall and water have a significant effect on weed persistence and distribution. The distribution patter n of rain is a determining factor in utilization of water supply by the plant, since water shortages at critical stages of growth are often responsible for failure of reproduction and sur vival. Wind velocity, frequency and direction may also restrict or limit the occurrence and persistence of weeds. Wind plays a role in stabilizing oxygen and carbon dioxide balance in the atmosphere. It also modifies the transpiration losses from all the plants. 3.2 Soil factors: Soil factors which influence weed persistence are soil water, aeration, temperature, pH , fertility level, and also cropping system. The ideal pH for most plants to grow range s from 6.2 to 7.3 . This is the range where nutrients are most available for uptake by the roots of plants. Some weed species are characteristically  alkali  plants, also known as basophiles (pH range 7.4 to 8.5) which can grow well in alkali soils , e.g., Alkaligrass ( Puccinallia spp.) and quackgrass (Agropyron repens ) Some w eed species like Cynodon dactylon , Digitaria sanguinalis and Borreria spp. habitat only in acidic soils (pH range 4.5 to 6.5)called Acedophiles . A shift in soil pH, for example, towards acid side due to continuous use of ammonium sulphate as a nitrogen source could also cause a shift in the weed spectrum. Several species of compositae and polygonaceae grow well in saline soils. These weeds serve as indicator plants. Some weed species like Commelina benghalensis thrive well in moist soil cond ition while the perennial grass like Imperata cylindric a, Agropyron repens etc. persist even in drought conditions. Weeds like Typha spp. live only in waterlogged soils. 3.3 Biotic factors: Plants and animals are the biotic factors that modify the growth in a variety of ways that affect weed persistence directly and indirectly. In a cropping situation, the major effects on we eds are those exerted by the crop as it competes for available resources like nutrients, light, space and water . Once certain weed specie s are introduced, their persistence in a given crop is determined largely by the degree of competition offered by the crop. Th e competitive ability of a weed and its persistence depends upon its vegetative habit, readiness of seed germination, rate of seed ling growth and the extent and nature of root and top growth. Besides, the agricultural practices associated with the crop grown may encourage or discourage specific weeds. Crops that serve as host to parasitic weeds and crop-induced stimulants and toxin (allelopathy) are also example of other biotic factors. Many factors influence the presence and abundance of weed species o n groups of weeds in fields. Important factors include: method of sowing, soil moisture, crop rotation, type and amount of fertili zers applied, time of fertili zers application, cultivar, water management; crop management and weed control methods used. These factors influence the weed growth and subsequently the productivity and quality of crop produce . These factors are manageable to pr ovide optim um crop stand and create microenvironment in favour of crop plants . 4. Survival Mechanism s of Weeds : The seed is the primary means of survival mechanism of annual weeds. The vegetative plant propagules such as buds, rhizomes, tubers, bulbs and stolons offer an additional survival mechanism for perennial weeds. The major adaptations for survival of weeds include prolific seed production, survival of vegetative propagules under adverse conditions , seed dissemination and dormancy, and ability of s eeds and propagules to resist any detrimental effects of environment. Of these, dormancy is probably the single most important characteristics of weed that enable them survive when crops cannot. 4.1 Seed Production: Seed production is the sole means of propag ation and survival of annual and biennial weeds while perennial weed are less dependent on this mechanism. A single plant of an annual weed can produce enough seeds in one season to cover an entire area of one acre with same weed species in the next year. For example, redroot pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus ), purslane ( Portula caoleracea ) and black nightshade ( Solanum nigrum ) produce approximately 196,405; 193,213 and 178,000 seeds per plant, respectively . Wild oats (Avena fatua ) germinate at the same time , the crop was shown but shatter their mature seeds before crop harvest operations33. 4.2 Seed Dissemination: Most weeds are good travellers. They use various forces or agents to transport and scatter themselves from place to place. Of all the agents by which weeds are disseminated, wind, water, animals and man play important roles. a. Wind: Many weeds seeds have modifications or adaptations e.g. , saccate, winged comate, parachute and plumed which aid them in getting scattered by the wind. Seeds or small fruits with tufts of hair or wing -like appendages are carried by the wind over long distances; the lighter seeds may drift for miles. The achn es of dandelions, CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 92 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management thistles and species of compositae floating in the air on a windy day are a common sight. Similarly, the seeds of Imperata cylindrica and Saccharaum spontaneum are carried away by wind to faraway places. b. Water: Many weed seeds are light or are covered with an oily film so that they float on the surface of water. Such seeds are frequently washed into the str eams by surface run -off during heavy rains or they are picked up by overflowing streams and are carried to other fields lower down the valley . c. Animals: Weed seeds are also disseminated by animals. Many seeds pass through the digestive tracts of animals wit hout loss of viability. Birds also consume large quantities of weed seeds and scatter them in droppings. The dispersal of seeds in the form of incompletely digested materials passing through the animals is termed as  endozoochory  . Seeds also stick to the fur, feathers and muddy feet of birds and animals and are carried from place to place. This method of dissemination is, however, not as important as the other means. d. Man: Seeds of many weed species have specialized structure like hooks, spines, barbs and awns which tend to cling to man s clothing and foot wear or agricultural implements used by man. Fruits of Tribulus terrestris have sharp spines which cling to animals and man and get dispersed far and wide. Achyranthus aspera and Chrysopoga aciculatus have awns which get disseminated by sticking to man s clothing. Weed seeds are carried in packing materials and in soil and sand or gravel used in construction. Man often carries weed seeds of interest from one part of the country to the other and from one cou ntry to another. The movement of commercial seeds and grain is an important means of weed seed dispersal by man, e.g. , widespread occurrence of Phalaris minor is because of its seeds contaminated the wheat grain imported in the 1960 s. 4.3 Seed Germination: Germination is a critical factor in the establishment of weed infestation. For germination, seeds of both crops and weeds must have adequate soil moisture, favourable temperature and a supply of oxygen. Weed seeds, however, possess a variety of special germination mechanisms adapted to changes in temperature, soil moisture, aeration, exposure to light, depth of burial of seeds etc. When conditions are unfavourable for germination, they can remain dormant or delay germination. Seeds of many weeds require a n exposure to light for germination. This is regulated by bluish -green protein pigment called phytochrome. Germination of the seeds of Lactuca (lettuce), Xanthium (cocklebur), Lepidium (pepper weed) and Rumex (sorrels) genera is controlled by phytochrome33. Many weeds germinate under aerobic conditions while some require anerobic conditions. Soil turn during ploughing and other land preparation operations exposes the seeds to light and induces germination. Summer annuals favour higher temperatures for germ ination and one can see flushes of weed seedlings when temperature reach es at favourable levels. Winter annuals germinate at lower temperature and shorter days in the autumn and winter seasons . Some weeds can germinate freely throughout the year. Viability is an integral and major part of weed infestation. 4.4. Seed Dormancy: Dormancy is a state in which viable seed fails to germinate in spite of favourable conditions of moisture, temperature and oxygen for plant growth. It is a survival mechanism of weed s. Further, w hen the conditions for germination are not favourable, seeds can become dormant. Seeds of weed species of Boraginaceae, Convo lvulaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Leguminasae and Poaceae have long dormancy period often running into several years. Types o f seed dormancy: a. Inherent or innate dormancy : It is due to the genetically controlled characters in the plant species , e.g., hard seed coats in Setaria and Xanthium spp. b. Induced dormancy : It develops when the non-dormant seed becomes dormant after exposure to sp ecific environmental conditions e.g., rise in temperature / CO 2 content in soil, low O 2 pressure, water logging etc. e.g . Avena ludoviciana seeds. c. Enforced dormancy : It is a non -specific character and it develops when limitations of the habitat or en vironment prevent non -dormant viable seeds from germinating and germination occurs only w hen the limitations are removed e.g. deep placement of seeds, when such seeds restored to the top 3 -5 cm of soil during ploughing, the seeds germinate . Absence of red light to some seeds a lso leads to enforced dormancy e.g., Aven a ludoviciana seeds. 5. Weed competition: The degree of weed competition is determined by the weed species infesting the area, density of infestation and duration of infestation. Weed species d iffer among themse lves in their competing ability e.g., Monochoria vaginalis is more severe competitor than Echinochloa crusgalli in rice culture. Similarly, Avena fatua was foun d more competitive in wheat than Setaria viridis . CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 93 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 5.1 Critical period of crop weed competition This is most important time period for Integrated Pest Management. The critical period for weed control is a period in the crop growth cycle during which weeds must be controlled to prevent yield losses. Critical period of crop weed comp etition observ ed in India w.r.t. various crops are given below: Table 1: General Critical period of crop weed competition for different important crops grown in India34 & 35 Crops Critical Period (DAS) * A. Cereals Rice (Direct Seeded) 15-45 Rice (Tran splanted) 30-45 Wheat 30-45 Maize 15-45 Sorghum 15-45 Pearl millet 30-45 B. Pulses Pigeon pea 15-60 Green gram 15-30 Black gram 15-30 Cowpea 15-30 Chickpea 30-60 Peas 30-45 Lentil 30-60 C. Oilseeds Soybean 20-45 Groundnut 40-60 Sunflower 30-45 Castor 30-60 Safflower 15-45 Sesamum 15-45 Rapeseed -mustard 15-40 Linseed 20-45 D. Commercial crops Sugarcane 30-120 Potato 20-40 Cotton 15-60 Jute 30-45 E. Vegetable crops Cauliflower 30-45 Cabbage 30-45 Okra 15-30 Tomato 30-45 Onion 30-75 F. Spices Cumin 20-40 * DAS= Days after sowing/planting 6. Principles of Weed Man agement: The principles that underline ecologically and economically viable weed management system are: (a) Adopting the weed manage ment options that suits to the environment of the region, including soil, water, climate and biotypes present at the site and (b) Optimizing the use of cultural, biological, physical, mechanical and chemical resources for effective management of weeds. An important principle underlying long -term weed management is that weed seed banks decides the emergent weeds population, and therefore, seed banks must be managed at low densities to reduce the potential build -up of high weed populations. 7. Integrated Wee d Management (IWM) IWM is a science -based decision -making process that coordinates the use of environmental information, weed biology and ecology, and all available technologies to control weeds by the most economical means, while posing the least possible risk to people and the environment. Effective IWM combines prev entive, cultural, mechanical, biological and chemical weed control methods in an effective, economical and ecological manner. Weed management must aim at reducing the weed population to a leve l at which weeds occurrence has no effect on farmers  economic and ecological interests. By using different appropriate management practices against weeds, farmers have more options for controlling weeds, thereby reducing the possibility of escapes and weed adaptation to any single weed management tactic. 7.1 Preventive: Weed prevention includes the measures to deny entry and establishment of new weeds in area. It includes (a) use of weed - free crop seeds , (b) seed certification (c) avoid contamination ma nure pits (d) prevent movement of weeds with other farm source s (e) by weed laws and (f) by quarantine laws. 7.2 Cultural 7.2.1 Crop rotations : Crop rotation is an important component of IWM. The choice and sequencing of crops affects long -term weed population dynamics, and consequently weed management. In traditional farming, rotations comprised of crops with different life cycles are a key component of weed management. Different planting and harvest dates among these crops provide more opportunities for farme rs to prevent either plant establishment or seed production by weeds. 7.2.2 Soil Solarization: Soil Solarization is a very simple technique of mulching the soil with transparent polyethylene sheet, especially when the soil has high moisture content during summer so as to trap more solar heat in the surface soil to raise the soil temperature to the level lethal to soil borne pests including weeds, pathogens and nematodes etc. During mulching CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 94 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management transparent polyethylene sheets should be buried on all the sides. Irriga tion treatment should be given by flooding one day before mulching. It favours the soil heating and increases the mean maximum soil temperature by about 90C at 5 cm depth and 70C at 10-15 cm depth. Duration of 4 -6 weeks of Soil Solarization is ideal for ac hieving the excellent results for rainy and winter seasons both and provides control of Trienthema portulacastrum , Dactyloctenium aegyptium , Digera arvensis , Echinochloa colonum , Eleusine indica in rainy season and Avena ludoviciana , Phalaris minor , Chenop odium album , Rumex dentatus , Fumaria parviflora in winter season36. In our country higher temperature prevails during the months of May - June. Simultaneously, there is very less cropping activities in these months at farmers  fields which provides a good op portunity for controlling the weeds, pathogens and nematodes etc. for a longer period by soil solarization which is an eco-friendly technique. However, soil solarisation should be selected on the basis of critical analysis of soil ecosystem as it contains several beneficial organisms which may also be affected. 7.2.3 Tillage : Tillage prior to crop establishment serves mainly to prepare a weed free seed bed. It eliminates established and emerged weeds prior to crop seeding and also moves weed seeds below the soil surface vertically, resulting in weed seed burial. It is suggested that an integrated weed management strategy involving summer ploughing and inter -crop cultivation are essential for effective weed control in direct -sown, flood -prone, lowland rice, i n order to ensure higher N -use ef ficiency and crop productivity. 7.2.4 Stale seed bed: A stale seed -bed is one where a flush of weeds are destroyed before planting of any crop. Most weed seeds germinate from top 4 to 5 cm of surface soil. If a finally prep ared seed -bed is withheld from planting and it contains adequate moisture in its top 4 to 5 cm of soil, a flush of young weed seedlings will grow on it in about a week s time. These weed seedlings can be destroyed either with shallow non -inverting tillage implement like, spike -tooth harrow /spring -tooth harrow / corrugated iron land roller / weeder - mulcher / sweeps. Depending upon the time available, one or two flushes of weeds can be destroyed in this manner before planting crops in the stale seed -beds. Th e main advantage of stale seed-beds is that crops germinate in weed -free environment . Stale seed -beds can be highly effective in controlling weeds in crops planted in a rain-free per iod with the help of irrigation e.g. berseem, l ucern, potato etc. in India . However, i n rainy season, an odd shower may make stale seed - beds to o compact to plant crops without further tillage of the land. Besides, rainy weather will transplant many weed seedlings dislodged during the preparation of the stale seed -beds. 7.2.5Crop competitiveness : Using high yielding crop variet ies which are more competitive against weeds in combination with other methods of weed control is one of the most economical approaches to attain optimal crop yield. 7.2.6 Crop mulching : Covering or mulchin g the soil surface can reduce weed problems by preventing weed seed germination or by suppressing the growth of emerging weed seedlings. Mulches can be made from a number of materials: a living plant ground cover (e.g. sugarcane trash) , loose particles of organic or inorganic matter spread over soil, and sheets of artificial or natural materials laid on the soil surface. 7.2.7 Time of sowing: In some crops early sowing have the advantage in favour of crop to suppress the weeds, (e.g., Wheat ) to compete with weeds that germinate later. 7.2.8 Row spacing: Row width may be reduced in some crops so that leaf canopy covers the soil faster and sheds out the weeds. However, closer spacing between rows should be balanced with keeping rows wide enough for hoeing/inte r-culture operations. 7.2.9 Seed rate: Higher seed rate increase the crop plant stand and cover the soil early to shed out the weeds within rows, e.g. wheat, soybean etc. 7.2.10 Zero tillage: The use of zero tillage would also reduce the costs of seeding. In rice -wheat system, under zero tillage, the time taken between rice harvest and wheat sowing is considerably shortened and early sowing of wheat after rice results in better early crop growth to supress the weeds and increase the wheat yield. If weed se ed production was minimized during the growing season, weed seedling emergence in no -till would decline across the years compared with tilled systems as the surface weed seed pool in no -till will depleted more rapidly by emergence and mortality. Burial of weed seeds in soil by tillage favours persistence across time, thus leading to more weed seedlings in later years. Farmers can get additional benefits from this pattern of weed seedling emergence in no-till systems when it is combined with crop diversity i n their rotations. 7.3 Mechanical /Physical: To control the weeds at early stage of crop establishment h and weeding is being practiced by farmers in India since they initiated agriculture. It is most effective eco-friendly weed management practice for annua l weeds. Hand weeding is ineffective against perennial weeds due to their regenerative capability. Mechanical management of CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 95 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management weeds consists of using machines or human made tools to suppress the we eds at the young stage of crops e.g. hand hoeing between rows of wheat, rotary -hoe / weeder -harrow in maize and soybean, inter-row cultivation (scuffling) by tractor drawn implements or bullock drawn cultivator in wider spacing crops like sugarcane etc. To manage the perenn ial weeds in non -crop areas, mow er may also be used to cut down the weeds from soil surface. Repeated mow ing of weeds may also be practiced to deplete the root reserves of the perennial weeds. 7.4 Biological : The Biological control of weeds comprises the use of living organisms to attack the specif ic weed population to keep it below threshold level without significantly affecting desirable plants. It includes use of insects, pathogens, nematodes, mites, parasitic plants and competing plants. Besides these, certain fish carps and snails may also be employed for the control of aquatic weeds. Historically, biological control method s have proved best on large infestation of a single weed species in range lands or in water bodies. Some outstanding examples of bio -control of weeds are the use of insect to control Pricklypear, Opuntia vulgaris (synonym Opuntia monocantha ) naturally by cochineal insect ( Dactylopius indicus )in 1795 and later Opuntia dillenii by Dactylopius tomantosus (D. punte) after 1926 ; Eichhornia crassipes , aquatic weed by weevil (Neochet ina bruchi and N. eichhorniae ) since 1982, control of Salvenia molesta , aquatic weed by weevil Cyrtobagous salviniae since 1983 -8437 & 38. Lantana camera , a bushy weed was also reported to be suppressed by tinged bug ( Teleonema scrupulosa) after 1940 , howev er, later this was declared unsafe and whole test culture was destroyed by FRI, Dehradun ; limited suppression of Siam weed ( Chromo molaena odorata ) in South India by Pareuchaetes pseudoinsulata Srilanka strains in rubber planta tions. Limited suppression of Crofton weed ( Ageratina adenophora / Eupatorium adenophorum / E. glandulosum ) by tephrited gall fly ( Procecid ochares utilis ) in Nilgiris (Tamil Nadu ), Darjeeling and Kalimpong areas . Limited success for control of Parthenium hy steroph orus weed has been ach ieved by Chrysomelid beetle (Zygogramma bicolorata )37. There is also report of suppression of Parthenium weed by more competitive leguminous plant Cassia tora, which is less harmful than Parthenium . Unfortunately, biological weed control has not developed to the point to make appreciable impact on the production of agronomic crops. However, the host specificity test and feeding potential of bio -control agents must also be taken into account while opting biological control of weeds. 7.5 Allelopathy: The detr imental effect of natural release of chemical compound (exudates) of one plant on another plant(s) called allelopathy. These compounds include phenolic acids, coumarins, terpenoids and flavonoids. These allelopathic chemicals inhibits the seed germination or reduce the growth of other plants species. These compounds are released from the plants as a vapour or leaching from the foliage or exudates from the roots or during decomposition of the plant residues. Allelopathy in natural plant communities is a significant factor in maintaining the present balance among the various plant species. The allelopathy can be used to manage certain kind of weeds in the cropping system. e.g. , root exudates of Cirsium sp. is deterimental to oat plants in the field; root exuda tes of Euphorbia spp. is injurious to the flex plants. Quack grass rhizome exudates is also reported to interfere with the uptake of nutrient by the Maize. Similarly, allelopathic effect of some crop plants may explore to manage the certain weed infestatio ns in the field. e.g. , isolate 1,3,7 - Trimethylxanthine from Coffeaarabica have been reported to inhibit the germination of Amaranthus spinosus ; and oat reported to have allelopathic effect on Chenopodium spp.33 7.6 Flame weeding Flame weeding may be used f or spot weeding. Gas presser and ground speed may be used to control the heat at which the weeds are killed. Exposure to heat for about one tenth of the second expands the water in the weeds & bursting of cell walls. In 3 -4 days weeds become brown and dead . The best results are obtained on hot dry days. 7.7 Chemical herbicide Use of chemical herbicide should be opted as a last resort for management of weeds in the field crops. The herbicides which are recommended by the CIBRC in a particular crop for contro l of specific weed species should only be advocated to the trainees / farmers. Herbicides are very selective and their dose, time of application, method of application, dilution in water, if any etc. should be adhere as per CIBRC claims for control of particular weed(s) in a particular crop. For the same label claims, if many herbicides formulations are recommended, the low a.i. dose herbicide may be preferred over higher a.i. dose herbicide. The details of CIBRC registered herbicides formulations recommend ed on various crops are available on the CIBRC website www.cibrc.gov.in . 7.7.1 Herbicide resistance Continuous use of a particular herbicides in a particular field may led to development of CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 96 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management resistance in the weeds and may exuberate the weed problems further . For example, in rice  wheat croppi ng system of Punjab and Haryana Phalaris minor became the most dominant and problematic weed in wheat crop for which Isoproturon herbicides was continuously used by farmers for more than a decade during ninet ies and Phalaris minor developed resistance against isoproturon in these specific areas . However, among weeds of rice, such resistance against herbicides has not reported, yet, in India. To avoid the development of resistance in a particular weed against a particular herbicide, use of same herbicide year after year should be avoided rather different recommended herbicides should be used on rotation basis. The Integra ted Pest management suggests that use of chemical herbicide s hould be the last resort of weed management in any field crop / non -crop areas. CBG -IPM: Weed ecology & Management 97 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management References: 1 Mukhopadhyay, S.K. (1992) Emerging problem and advances in weed management. Presidential address, Agricultural Section, Indian Science Congress, Vadodara. pp 2 -3. 2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echinochloa_colon a 3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echinochloa_crus - galli 4 http://www.astrogle.com/ayurveda/eclipta -alba- bhringraj -benefits -and-usages.html 5 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digitaria_sanguina lis 6 http://en.wikipedia.o rg/wiki/Euphorbia_hirta 7 http://www.hear.org/pier/imagepages/singles/st arr_010520_0109_amaranthus_viridis.htm 8 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chenopodium_alb um 9 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalaris_minor 10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melilotus_indicus 11 http://en .wikipedia.org/wiki/Poa 12 http://pakflora.freshbiology.net/main/pakflora/fi ndspp.php?spp=Rumex%20dentatus 13 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phyllanthus_niruri 14 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daucus_carota 15 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Launaea 16 http://en.wikipedia.org /wiki/Cynodon_dactylon 17 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Agrop yron_repens 18 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyperus_rotundus 19 http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/grami noid/sorhal/all.html 20 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lantana_camara 21 http://en.wikipedia .org/wiki/Oxalis_latifolia 22 http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleome_viscosa 23 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eichh ornia_crassipes 24 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salvinia_molesta 25 http://www.plantdex.com/index.php/weeds/261 -cirsium -arvense -creeping -thistle 26 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperata 27 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sacch arum_spontaneum_ -_Indian_Botanic Garden _ - _Howrah_2012 -09-20_0174 28 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuscuta_campestri s 29 http://species.wikimedia.org/wiki/Striga_angust ifolia 30 http://w ww.tifton.uga.edu/fat/PlantParasitesPM. htm 31 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolvulus_arven sis 32 http://08hachi.blogspot.in/2011/08/devils - horsewhip -achyranthes -aspera -l.html 33 Rao, V.S. (1983) Principles of weed science. Oxford and IBH Publishing, New Delhi. 34 Mishra, J.S. (1997) Critical period of weed competition and losses due to weeds in major field crops. Farmer and Parliament. 33(6): 19 - 20. 35 Kumar, Subhash (2001) Critical Period of weed competition in cumin ( Cuminum cyminum L.). Indian Journal of Weed Science . 33(1&2): 30 - 33. 36 Yaduraju, N.T. 1997. Solarization in weed management. In proceedings, International Symposium on Integrated Weed Management for sustainable Agriculture. Vol. I, pp 346 -347. 37 Bhan, V.M. et.al. (1998) Weed Management, chapter in 50 years of agronomic research in India. Indian Society of Agronomy, pp 155 - 192. 38 Gupta, O.P. (1984) Scientific Weed Management. Todays and Tomorrow s Printers & Publishres, New Delhi. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 98 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management MASS PRODUCTION OF Trichogramma sp. AND Trichogrammatoidea sp. Introduction: The genus Trichogramma and Trichogrammatoidea are cosmopolitan in distribution and parasitizing more than 200 species of Lepidoptera, Neuroptera, Diptera, Hemiptera, Coleoptera and Hymenoptera . Majority of Trichogramma and Trichogrammatoidea are primary parasitoids eggs of Lepidoptera (Tanwar et al. 2006 ). It is important for plant protection because of its wide spread natural occurrence and its success as biological control age nt by mass releasing (Lenteren 2003) . Since this parasitoid kills the pest in the egg stage itself before the pest could cause any damage to the crop and also that it is quite amenable to mass production in the laboratories, it has the distinction of being the highest produced and most utilized biological control agent in the world . Trichogrammatidae includes the smallest of insects, ranging in size from 0.2 to 1.5 mm (Nagaraja, 1978) . Trichogramma are difficult to identify because they are so small and hav e generally uniform morphological characters. Also, certain physical characteristics such as body color and the number and length of body hairs can vary with body size, season, rearing temperature and the host on which the adult was reared (Nagaraja, 1978) . Taxonomy, Identification and Distribution: A major advance in the systematics of Trichogramma was the discovery that characteristics of male genitalia can be used to identify species. This is the primary means of identification today, but body col or, wing venation and features of the antennae serve as supporting characteristics (Nagaraja & Nagarkatti, 1970; Viggiani, 1971) . CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 99 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Females cannot be identified with the same level of confidence, so collections submitted for identification must include males in addition to physical characteristics; studies of reproductive compatibility and mode of reproduction also have been especially valuable in identifying species (Girault, 1915 ; Pinto, 2006 ). Distinguishing features between Trichogramma and Trichogrammat oidea (Adopted from NBAII) Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Chalcidoidea Family: Trichogrammatidae S N species Host Com mon crop Distributi on 1. Trichogramma achaeae Nagaraja & Nagarkatti Egg of Lepidop tera Field and orchar d crop Cosmopo litan 2. Trichogramma chilonis Ishii Egg of Lepidop tera Field and orchar d crop Cosmopo litan 3. Trichogramma japonicum Ashmead Egg of Lepidop tera Field and orchar d crop Cosmopo litan 4. Trichogramma Egg of Field Cosmopopretiosum Riley Lepidop tera and orchar d crop litan 5. Trichogramma toidea bactrae Nagaraja Egg of Lepidop tera Field and orchar d crop Cosmopo litan Biology of Trichogramma and Trichogrammatoidea (Adopted from Tanwar et al., 2006) The development of all Trichogramma spp. is very similar. Being an egg paras ite, the female drills a hole through the chorion and deposits its eggs within the egg of the host. The internal pressure of the egg forces a small drop of yolk out of the oviposition hole. Females feed on this yolk, which increases their longevity and und er laboratory conditions a female parasitizes from one to ten eggs per day or from ten to 190 during her life. Egg: The number of eggs laid per host egg may vary from 1 to 20 or more depending upon the size of the host egg. However in sugarcane, in which moth borer eggs are small, generally 1 or 2 parasites develop per egg. Large females parasitize more eggs than smaller females. A female parasitoid can distinguish already parasitised eggs, thereby avoiding superparasitism or multiple - parasitism under natu ral conditions. Fecundity varies from 20 to 200 eggs per female according to the species, the host, and the longevity of the adult. Eggs in the early stages of development are more suitable for parasite development. Larva: During the 3rd instar (3 to 4 da ys after the host egg was parasitized) dark melanin granules are deposited on the inner surface of the egg chorion, causing the host egg to turn black. This is an invaluable diagnostic character for distinguishing them from unparasitised eggs. Pupa: Larva e transform to the inactive pupal stage. Adult: The wasps emerge from the pupae and escape the host egg by chewing a circular hole in the egg shell. The black layer inside the chorion and the exit hole are evidence of parasitism by Trichogramma . The egg, l arval and pupal stages of Trichogramma at 28   20C are completed in about 1 day, 3 to 4 days, and 4 to 5 days respectively. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 100 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Thus, the life cycle is completed in 8 to 10 days, but it may be prolonged at lower temperatures or hampered at very high temperat ures. The adults are short lived (6 -8 days). Mating and oviposition take place immediately after emergence. The sex ratio is generally 1:1. Material required for Mass rearing: 1. Corcyra cage 2. Oviposition cage 3. Moth collecting device 4. Sterilization chamber 5. Cleaning device 6. Consumable material Mass production Different species and strains of Trichogramma typically prefer different host eggs and crop habitats and have different searching abilities and tolerance to weather conditions. Efficacy is improved b y selecting the most effective and adapted species or strain for the specific crop / pest situation. In the laboratory the parasitoids are multiplied on Corcyra eggs. The eggs laid by the Corcyra moths are collected and sieved to remove the moth scales etc . The pure eggs thus obtained are exposed to ultra - violet light in UV chamber to kill the host embryo but at the same time permit parasitisation . UV Chamber Laminar flow The quantity of the sterilized eggs is assessed in a measuring cylinder volu metrically. The eggs in volume of 0.5cc is then sprinkled uniformly over a 144 gsm (chart paper) card. Label information on CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 101 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management the manufacturer, species of the parasitoid, date of parasitization and expected date of emergence are given . The size of the card i s 03cm x 18cm for 0.5cc of eggs. A coat of 10% gum is applied on the grids and the eggs are sprinkled uniformly in a single layer with the aid of a tea strainer. The excess eggs pasted are removed by gently passing a shoe brush over the card after suffi cient air drying under fan. Figs.___. Corcyra rearing cage outer view and Inner view The egg cards are placed into polythene bags of suitable size and the nucleus card of Trichogramma are introduced in it. The easiest way to accomplish this is to p lace a piece of   Tricho egg card  containing parasitized eggs that are ready to yield the adults and to hold them in subdued light for 2 to 3 days. The emerging parasites readily parasitize the fresh eggs. The parasitoid - host ratio is adjusted accor dingly to 1:6 get effective parasitism. The parasitized eggs in the Tricho Card turn back in 3 or 4 days and the adult parasitoids emerge in 8 to 10 days from the date of parasitization. The parasitized eggs in which the parasitoids in the larval or pupa l stage (i.e. before or after turning black) can be stored in the refrigerator (at 50C) for about 3 weeks without any loss in emergence. Precautions Poor quality of mass reared Trichogramma can result in control failures. The artificial conditions of mass rearing can select for genetic changes that reduce the effectiveness of the Trichogramma in the field. Such rearing conditions include rearing multiple generations on unnatural host eggs, the absence of plants, crowding and interference, rapid generation time, and failure to rejuvenate genetic stock. Except for obvious problems such as lack of adult emergence or wing deformities, growers and pest consultants cannot detect poor quality Trichogramma prior to release. Commercial suppliers are responsible for maintaining desirable characteristics necessary for good performance in the field. Production colonies should be periodically replaced with individuals from a stock culture maintained on the natural or target host. Suppliers also should assess the per cent host egg parasitization, adult emergence, and the sex ratio of emerged adults to be sure they are within acceptable standards. Standards for established cultures on Corcyra are 95 5 per cent egg parasitization, 90 5 per cent adult emergence, and a sex rat io of 1 to 1.5 females per male. Field release: The parasitoids are released in the pharate stage or when few adults begin to emerge from the host egg during the evening hours. The cards are cut into bits neatly along the grids with least damage to the egg s and stapled beneath the foliage in the upper canopy level. To maximize the field parasitization it is recommended to release the parasitoids is as many locations as possible. Recently scientists are beginning to advocate the release of cards @ 1/5m row l ength. Maintenance of history sheet Accurate information is needed on the history of individual basins. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 102 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management The following information is furnished. 1. Date of egg infestation 2. Date of preparation of feed 3. Source of egg 4. Expected date of adult emergence 5. Daily collec tion of moths 6. Problems encountered with the basin during production Production of Host: Corcyra cephalonica commonly called as rice meal moth or rice moth is a pest of stored foods, viz.,cereals, cereal products, oilseeds, pulses, dried fruits, nuts and s pices. Many of the natural enemies mass -bred in the laboratory for use in field against crop pests are dependent on either egg or larval stages of Corcyra due to the simple reason that it is easier and cheaper to produce natural enemies on different stages of Corcyra than on their original hosts. Procedure 1. Preparation of rearing basins The basins used for Corcyra multiplication are thoroughly cleaned and sterilized with formaldehyde. Whenever the trays are emptied after a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning steps are repeated. 2. Preparation of Jo war medium for Corcyra : a. The required quantities of jo war grains are coarsely milled and broken into 2-3 pieces in a milling machine. The broken grains are heat sterilized at 100oC for 1 hour to eliminate the residual population of stored product insects viz., Rhyzopertha dominica , Sitotroga cerealella , Tribolium castaneum and fungal contaminants. Upon s terilization the grains are cooled under fan in a clean area. The grains are then transferred to basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. b. Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken using a pounding machine or a mechanical blender (domestic mixer). Then 100 g of the broken kernel is transferred to each basin and the contents are hand mixed thoroughly. c. Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sulfur is added @ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% streptomycin sulfate and mixing of the contents follows this. This medium is used for rearing Corcyra larvae. d. The number of basins required for egg infestation is calculated and the medium is prepared accordingly. 3. Preparation of Corcyra eggs: The primary source of Corcyra eggs is re puted laboratories, commercial producers for bulk preparation. If it is intended to begin the production with nucleus colony, the adult moths can be collected from warehouses where the food materials are stored. a. The eggs used for building up the colon y of Corcyra have to be free from contaminants like the moth scales and broken limbs and not exposed to UV light. b. The collections of overnight laid eggs are measured volumetrically to ascertain the number of trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of eggs is known to contain approximately 16000   18000 eggs. 4. Infestation of medium with eggs The overall production scheme involves initial infestation of the medium with Corcyra eggs in desired quantities. This is accomplished by sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc eggs of Corcyra is infested. The basins are carefully transferred to the racks. 5. Handling the trays during larval development The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin t o feed the fortified joar medium. At this stage, light webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae grow up they move down. During this period the larvae are allowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. Handling of adults : The adults begin to emerge in 28-30 days after infestation of the eggs. The adults can be seen on the inside the cage. They are either aspirated with mechanical moth collector or collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation is carried out in a tent of mosquito net. This prevents the large -scale escape of the moths, which if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and spoil the grains stored by laying eggs. Workers involved in the collection of moths should wear face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of scales. The moths collected are transferred to the oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time. The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made of plastic. The drums rest on tripod frames with legs of height 5cm. The bottoms of the drums are provided with wire meshes that enable collection of eggs. The walls of the drums have two vents (ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The vents are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of the drums have handles besides slots for introducing the moths and adult feed. The ovi position drums filled in a day are maintained for four to seven successive days for egg collection after which are emptied and cleaned for next cycle of use. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 103 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management The adults are provided feed containing honey solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 ml honey with 50 ml water. The feed is stored in refrigerator and used as and when required. Piece of cotton wool tied with a thread is soaked in the solution and inserted into the drum through the slot at the top. From a basin, moths can be collected upto 9 0 days after which the number of moths emerging dwindles down and keeping the basins is not economical for the producer. Handling of eggs : The moths lay the eggs in large numbers loosely. The scales and broken limbs are also found in larger quantities alon g with the eggs. They cause potential hazard to the workers after years of working in Corcyra laboratory. To minimize the risk of scales freely floating in the air, the oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter paper in enamel trays which trap effec tively the scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the workers comfort. Daily morning the oviposition drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are cleaned gently with a shoe brush so that th e eggs and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the mesh are collected along with those on the filter paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling the eggs on filter paper to another container. Then they are passed to sieves in series and finall y clean eggs are collected. The eggs are quantified in measuring cylinders and used for building up the stocks and natural enemy production. About 100 pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 4 days laying period inside the oviposition drums. From each ba sin an average of 2500 moths are collected. Hence from each basin 18.00   20.00 cc of eggs can be obtained in 90 days. Reference Girault, A.A. (1915 ) Australian Hymenoptera Chalcidoidea I. Second supplement. Memoirs of the Queensland Museum . 3:142 -153 Viggiani, G. (1971 ). The significance of the male genitalia in the Trichogrammatidae (Hym., Chalcidoidea). Proceedings, XIII International Congress of Entomology, Moscow 1:313 -314. Pinto, J.D. (2006 ). A review of the New World genera of Trichogrammatidae (Hym enoptera). Journal of Hymenoptera Research . 15(1):49 -51. Tanwar, R.K., Bambawale, O.M. and Singh, Surender Kumar and Singh, Amerika (2006). A Handbook on Trichogramma : production and field release. National Centre for Integrated Pest Management, New Delhi  12. Mass production of Bracon hebetor Introduction: Bracon hebetor is a common gregarious ecto   larval parasitoid. There appears to be two strains of the parasitoid, one attacking field pests and the other stored product pests. Among the hosts recorded are Corcyra cephalanica, Dichocracis punctiferalis, Eublemma olivacea, Hellula undalis, Ostriniaicius kashmirica, Helicoverpa armigera and Opisina arenosella of which the O. arenosella is the important host. Parasitism is observed throughout the year, it ranged from 26.2 to 26.7% during the peak period of O. arenosella infestation. Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Hymenoptera Family: Braconidae S N Specie s Host Crop Distribution 1. Bracon hebetor Mostly larval parasitoids of lapidopter a Field and orchar d crop Cosmopolita n Production procedure: B. hebetor is reared on C. cephalonica at wide ranging temperature and fluctuating relative humidity. Pairs sorted out from freshly emerged brood are caged in specimen tubes (8 x 2.5 cm). Under laboratory c onditions it is easy to rear. Fifth instar caterpillars of C. cephalonica of similar size are provided for oviposition and the parasitized larva removed daily from the tubes and maintained separately. The parasitoids are fed with 50% honey provided as ti ny droplets on wax -coated paper strips. B. hebetor completes its total developmental period in 7 -12 days. The egg, larval and pupal period are completed in 1 -2, 2-4 and 3 -7 days respectively. The females start laying eggs 2 -5 days after emergence on parti ally paralyzed host caterpillars. The paralyzed larvae (not receiving the eggs) die within 3 -5 days. Female parasitoids feed on host s haemolymph. The eggs are laid singly or in groups of two to eight. A female is capable of laying 229 eggs (142 - 345) on 1 4-32 host caterpillars during its life span of 20 -63 days, the daily average being 2 -27, and CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 104 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management laid maximum number of eggs during the first ten days of oviposition period. A single host larva supports the development of 11 eggs and 9 larvae of the parasitoid . The preoviposition period is 3 days, oviposition period 22-55 days and post oviposition period 1 -8 days. The fertile female lives for 20 -63 days. B. hebetor complete its developmental period on larvae of Corcyra cephalonica in 8.6 (7 -10) days. Oviposit ion period lasts for 13 (5 -22) days. The mean fecundity is 72 (13   148). Females live for 24-53 days. Egg viability is 92% and adult emergence 81%. Male to female ratio is 5:1. Precautions: To avoid wastage, the surplus parasitoids could be stored in the cocoon stage for one month in the refrigerator. The coccons are kept in a clear plastic jar (19x9 cm) for emergence and provided with raisins as food. Segregate the mite ( Pediculoides ventricosus ) infested cultures of the host insect immediately. Mass production of Goniozus nephantidis Introduction Goniozus nephantidis is the most widely used parasitoid of Opisina arenosella . It is a sturdy gregarious larval or prepupal ectoparasitoid. The female practices maternal care of eggs and larvae. The host la rvae are parasitized and the parasitoid even feeds on host body fluid. The parasitoid is also capable of suppressing the population by merely stinging and paralyzing 1st   2nd instar larvae. G. nephantidis is the most common and effective parasitoid of la te instars caterpillars of O. arenosella in several parts of the country. The parasitoid is being mass multiplied and released in Karnataka, Kerala and several other states. Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Hymenoptera Family: Bethylidae S N Specie s Host Crop Distributio n 1. Goniozus nephantidis Larval ectoparasitoi d of the coconut black -headed caterpillar, Opisina arenosella Field and orchar d crop Andhra Pradesh; Karnataka; Kerala; Tamil Nadu etc. Production procedure : The parasitoid is multiplied on Corcyra cephalonica larvae in diffused light. A pair of parasitoid is introduced in tube (7.5 x 2.5 cm). The adults are provided honey in the form of small droplets on wax coated paper. After a pre - oviposition period of six days one healthy last insta r larva is provided in a vial. The larvae parasitized and containing eggs of G. nephantidis are removed regularly from the vials till the death of the female. Such larvae are kept in accordion type strips of paper in plastic boxes which are covered by mus lin cloth. Considering the fecundity as 20 -50, the female is capable of parasitizing 6 -7 larvae in three oviposition spells each separated by 4 -5 days. The life cycle of the parasitoid is completed in 10-14 days (incubation 24 -36 hrs, larval feeding 36 - 48 hrs, prepupal stage 48 -60 hrs and cocoon period 48 to 56 hrs + resting adult inside the cocoon 108 - 128 hrs). Mass production of Chelonus blackburni Introduction Chelonus blackburni is introduced from Hawaii. A parthenogenetic egg -larval parasitoid, C. blackburnii has a fairly wide host range but in India the common meal moth Corcyra cephalonica and potato tuber moth Phthorimaea operculella have often been used for multiplication of this parasitoid. Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Hymenoptera Fam ily: Braconidae S N specie s Host Crop Distribution 2. Chelonus blackburni Mostly egg larval parasitoids of Lepidopter a Field and orchar d crop Cosmopolita n Production procedure A set of 100, 0 -24 hr old eggs of Corcyra (not exposed to UV) are pasted to 5 x 5 cm card. This CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 105 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management card containing eggs is exposed to 30 C. blackburnii adults in a 1.5 l container. The plastic container has windows with plastic mesh for aeration. Two cotton swabs, one soaked in 10% honey solution and the other in drinking water are al so placed inside from the side opening which is closed tightly with a cloth covered cotton plug. The egg card after exposing to C. blackburnii for 24 hrs is removed and placed on 500 g sterilized Pearl millet medium. In 30 days time, adults start emerging from the cocoons formed in the Pearl millet medium after completing development on Corcyra larvae. The adults live for 25 days and their fecundity is about 400 eggs. Mass production of Trichoderma viridae Introduction Trichoderma viridae besides other species of the genus, is an omnipresent saprophytic fungus. Its colonization in rhizosphere of crop plants renders long time protection against diseases, improved growth of plants besides imparting resistance. Such species as T. harzianum, T. hamatum, T. l ignorum and their biotypes have the most biological and commercial importance. Trichoderma biofungicides are highly effective against the powdery mildew, the grey and the white rot, the mildew and other diseases. Active components of biopesticides made from this fungus are their spores, mycelium and metabolites. Trichoderma is able to suppress more than 60 species of pathogens (Pythium, Botritis, Phoma, Sclerotinia, Fusarium, Ascochyta, Alternaria, etc.) on different plants (cucumbers, tomatoes, cabbages, p eppers, various ornamentals, cereals and grain legume crops). Taxonomy, Identification and distribution Kingdom: Fungi Class: Sordariomycetes Order: Hypocreales Family: Hypocreaceae Genus: Trichoderma Species: viridae Trichoderma viridae is widely distrib uted in the world and found in substantial numbers in nearly all agricultural soils and in other environments such as decaying wood, etc. Trichoderma viridae colonies on dead wood and other organic matter Biology of biological control agents Trichode rma viridae form hyaline, branched and septate hyphae with profuse conidiophores and conidial formation. Conidiospores are ovoid to round spores, green in colour. Conidiophores and conidiospores under microscope Among their other activities, they gro w tropically toward hyphae of other fungi, coil about them in a lectin -mediated reaction, and degrade cell walls of the target fungi. This process (mycoparastitism) limits growth and activity of plant pathogenic fungi. Mycoparasites produce cell wall-degra ding enzymes, which allow them to bore CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 106 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management holes into other fungi and extract nut rients for their own growth. In the process of development Trichoderma synthesizes a lot of antibiotics (gliotoxin, viridine, trichodermin, etc.). Mass production of biological c ontrol agent Production on PDA Materials required Potato 200 gm Carboxy Methyl Cellulose 5 gm/kg Distilled Water 1 litre Streptocyclin 03.5 gm Agar -Agar 20 gm D-glucose 20 gm Method 1) Take 200gm healthy Potato, wash with distilled water, cut it into slice and keep in a beaker 2) Add 400 ml distilled water and boil it for 45 min. till starch oozes out from potato slices 3) Filter the content through fine muslin cloth and save the effluents 4) Add 20 gm Agar -Agar, 20 gm D -glucose and heat it till Agar -Agar solubilizes 5) Make the required volume 1 litre by adding distilled water 6) Transfer the content in a conical flask and close the mouth with cotton plug, wrap the mouth with Aluminium foil and tie with thread 7) Autoclave it for 15 m in at 15psi 8) After completion of Autoclaving process, remove the conical flask and allow it to cool 9) Add 0.5gm Streptocyclin per litre of media and mix it properly 10) Transfer the media into test tube/Petri Dishes under Laminar Air Flow Chamber 11) Wh en media get solidified, use sterile inoculation needle and under spirit lamp inside LAFC 12) Take the Trichoderma culture from mother stocks with sterile inoculation needle and inoculate it into fresh PDA media 13) Close the mouth and seal the petriplate with Parafilm 14) Keep the petriplate inside Incubator/at room temperature Trichoderma viridae colony on PDA Production on broken maize, sorghum or finger millets Material required Sorghum/ Maize broken grains, distilled water, hot air drier, autoclav able bags/ conical flasks, autoclave, D -Glucose/ Jaggery, Yeast extract, Cotton plugs, Streptocyclin, inoculation needle, muslin cloth, grinder, talcum Powder, carboxy methyl cellulose Procedure 1) Take 100 gm broken maize/sorgum grain, wash with distill ed water properly and keep in hot air drier for 15 min. 2) Transfer the grains from drier to autoclavable polybag/conical flask 3) Add 100ml distilled water, 1gm D - glucose/Jaggery and 0.5gm Yeast extract 4) Mix the content by proper shaking and plug the mouth with cotton plug and tie with thread 5) Autoclave the polybag/conical flask for 15 -20 minute at 15psi 6) After Autoclaving, remove the polybag/conical flask and allow the content to cool 7) Add 0.01gm streptocyclin solution and shake 8) Under LAFC, pe rform Inoculation of Trichoderma culture by using sterile inoculation needle 9) Plug the mouth with cotton and tie with thread and keep the inoculated polybag/conical flask inside incubator/at room temp for 6 -7 days. 10) After full growth of mycelia, remov e the material in a plastic tray , spread with spreader and cover with thin black muslin cloth and allow it to shade dry for 5 -6 days 11) After complete drying, grind the Trichoderma material to powder using grinder 12) Prepare the 1000 Gm ready to use for mulation as below: Trichoderma material 100gm + Talcum Powder 900gm + Carboxy methyl cellulose 5gm Application Suspend Trichoderma viride material in sufficient water (500g/100L) to achieve uniform application. Apply at the rate of 100 -200 g per cubic me tre (loose) of greenhouse potting mix, soil or planting beds. Trichoderma viride can be applied through low pressure watering nozzles such as fan nozzles or other watering systems (drip system) after filtering with filters. Agitate to maintain suspension. For best effect, treat potting mix several days before use for seeding or transplants. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 107 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management For bulbs & Ornamentals: Dip bulbs in Trichoderma viride suspension (100 g/L) prior to planting. Dose Soil application: 5 kg /ha along with any organic fertilizer (wit hout pathogenic contaminants). Seed treatment: @ 4 -5 gm per kg of seeds as per standard wet treatment. Seedling treatment: @ 100 g/l prior to planting. It is necessary to incorporate the conidia of Trichoderma every 10  15 days for the control of the mentio ned phytopathogens. Two to three applications in vegetables ornamentals and 4 -5 applications in lawns and landscape crops are recommended. Applications during early stages of plant growth protect the plant during critical stages of development. Precaution There are some limitations for the application of Trichoderma biofungicides. At first they are preventive only because biofungicides are usually not able to control the diseases, which have already developed. The fungicides containing Trichoderma are effe ctive at temperatures more than 14 C (the optimal threshold of development is observed at 24 28 C). Use of the conidial form of the fungicide makes the application independent on the conditions of relative air humidity. Reference Baby, U.I. 1998. Biocontr ol potential of fungicide resistant mutants of Trichoderma spp. Indian Journal of Microbiology 38(3): 165 -166. Biswas, K.K. 1999. Screening of isolates of Trichoderma harzianum Rifai for their relative biocontrol efficacy against Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. udum and Rhizoctonia solani Kuhn. Annals of Plant Protection Sciences 7 (2): 125 -130. Bora, L.C., Minku, Das., Das, B.C. and Das, M. 2000. Influence of microbial antagonists and soil amendments on bacterial wilt severity and yield of tomato ( Lycopersicon esculentum ). Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences 70 (6): 390 - 392. Chakrabarti, D.K., Kumar, R. and Prasad, J. 1998. Stem rot of Psoralea corylifolia and its biological control. Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences 68 (6) : 333 -335. Mass product ion of Beauveria bassiana Introduction Beauveria bassiana is a mitosporitic and aggressive entomopathogenic fungus, attacking a wide host range of insects at larval or adult stages. It was the first recorded entomopathogen in world (Bassi 1835). It attac ks all stages of insects of all groups. Some of the pests of economic importance , which can be targeted for control through B. Bassiana are Helicoverpa armigera , Spodoptera spp., Odontotermis spp, Chilo infuscatellus , Ideoscopus spp, Bemisia tabaci , etc. (Bambawale et al 2005). Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Valid scientific name: Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) Vuillemin Kingdom: Fungi Class: Sordariomycetes Order: Hypocreales Family: Clavicipitaceae Genus: Beauveria Speci es: bassiana B. Bassiana occurs world wide and has one of the largest host lists among imperfect fungi. It occurs as a ubiquitous saprophyte in soil (Bambawale et al 2005). The pathogen is of cosmopolitan nature. The hosts include mainly Lepidoptera, Col eoptera, Hemiptera, Diptera and Hymenoptera. Biology of Beauveria bassiana Beauveria bassiana is an anamorphic fungus with septate hyaline mycelium. Colonies appear white in cultures or tufts of white mycelium bearing masses of powdery spores. Conidioph ores bear conidia in acropetal succession. The conidiospores are tiny, measuring only a few microns. A spore is produced at the tip of the mother cell and the growth of the mother cell ceases. A new growing point initiates just below this terminal spore, g rows past it and a second spore is produced at a higher level. This uses up the new growing point and a third growing point is then initiated just below the second spore. Every time a spore is produced the hyphal tip is used up and a new growing point is produced. In this way a succession of spores is produced with the youngest spore at the tip (= i.e acropetal succession) and the spore head gets longer and longer. When all the spores are dislodged the spore -bearing tip of the conidiogenous cell has a zig zag appearance and is referred to as a rachis ( this CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 108 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management term is also used for the seed head in wheat when all the seeds are gone). Microphotograph of Beauveria bassiana conidiophores Beauveria bassiana in action as entomopathogen The action of B. bassiana on insects begins from the penetration of spores in a body cavity through dermal coat (cuticle). High humidity or free water is essential for conidial germination and infection establishes between 24 and 48 hours. Having penetrated in a body the spores ger minate in hyphae, then a mycelium overgrows from which conidia split off. Having proved in the body the conidia begin to circulate in hemolymph. Mycelium gradually fills up the whole body of the insect. In the beginning muscular tissue is affected. Fungus growth continues until all the tissues are destroyed. The infected insect may live for three to five days after hyphal penetration and, after death, the conidiophores bearing conidia are produced. The fungus can form conidiophores, which rupture the cuticl e and the envelope of a dead larva. The affected insect is covered with white, wadded coating (conidiophores). Then it is observed spore maturation, and mass sporulation begins. The spores are tiny, measuring only a few microns. Colonies appear as tufts of white mycelium bearing masses of powdery spores burst out through the body parts of infected insects. Beauveria bassiana attacking insects The effectiveness of Beauveria bassiana depends very much on climatic conditions, th e methods of application and doses. The best hydrothermal conditions for the development of B. bassiana are: a temperature of 25  28 C, a relative air humidity of 80 90%. Mass Production of Beauveria bassiana Material required Base material, e.g. parboil ed rice, autoclavable bags of appropriate size, cotton plugs, thread, pressure cooker, stove/ hot plate, 5% Sodium hypochlorite solution, UV Lamp, Syringe for inoculation, Streptocyclin . Procedure Soak parboiled rice in water for 30 min Drain & fill in po lythene bags @ 1 kg equally distributed in 5 bags (200 g/ bag) Close mouth of bag with cotton plug & tie with thread Place about 15 bags (3 kg material) in the pressure cooker and cook with some quantity of water. After 3 whistles reduce the flame and allo w heating for 15 min. Clean working table with 5% sodium hypochlorite solution & switch on the UV lamp. Take out the bags & remove water adhering to the sides with tissue paper and place in a clean tray. Switch off UV lamp. Place the bags on working table and allow further cooling Sterilize the syringe along with the rice bags CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 109 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Holding the liquid mother culture bottle above the flame, remove plug and add 2 drops of surfactant and 10 drops of antibiotic & shake well Draw 15 ml liquid culture in the sterilize d syringe and inject into the bag through cotton plug [Care to avoid puncturing of bag] Mix well, spread rice grain within bag and place in racks for incubation After 2 weeks incubation, on profuse sporulation, gently crush the lumps into individual grains Cut open bags from sides, spread the culture within the bag and allow drying for 4 -5 days After complete drying, separate the spores by sieving Allow drying on the work bench for about 3 days. A good culture with 1 kg rice yields about 40 g dry conidia in two or 3 sievings at weekly intervals. Sieving should be done under hood to avoid inhalation of spores. Pack the dried spores in laminated aluminium foil and store in freezer compartment of a refrigerator. Precaution The fungus has been kwon to cause inf ection of nasal passage in human, therefore caution is necessary (Amerika Singh et al 2005). Maintenance of quality Formulations should contain conidia of Beauveria bassiana at a concentration of 2.3 x 107 spores per ml or at least 5 x 108 spores per gram . Viability of the spores is determined by culture on nutrient agar and counting the colonies formed. Efficacy is checked by bioassay with an appropriate insect. Field release Beauveria bassiana is released as foliar sprays against borers, whitefly, thrip s, aphids, mealybugs and a range of soft -bodied coleopteran, homopteran and heteropteran pests. Application rates depend upon the crop and the pests to be controlled. Dose The normal application rate on commodity crops is 750 to 1000 ml of product per hec tare, for ornamentals under cover or outdoors 24 to 80 ml per 10 litres and on turf and lawns 32 to 96 ml per 100 square metres. Reference Bassi A. (1835). Del mal del segno calcinaccio moscardino malattia che affeigge bachi de seta. 1. Teorica. Orcesi, Lo di. Bambawale, O.M., Sangale, U.R., Nasim Ahmad & Meena, B.L. 2005. Potential of Fungal and Bacterial Pathogens in the Management of Key Lepidopteran Pests. In: Integrated Pest Management - Principles and Applications Volume 1: Principles, Eds Amerika Singh , OP Sharma & DK Garg. Pp 100 -119. Bhadauria, Bhanu Pratap, Smita Puri & PK Singh (2012). Mass Production of Entomopathogenic Fungi using Agricultural products. The Bioscan 7(2): 229 -232. Latifian M., Bahar Rad, Majid Amani and Esmaeil Rahkhodaei (2013). M ass production of entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana (Balsamo) by using agricultural products based on liquid -solid diphasic method for date palm pest control. International Journal of Agriculture and Crop Sciences 5(19): 2337 -2341. Product ion of t he nuclear polyhedrosis virus of Helicoverpa armigera Introduction In India, Helicoverpa armigera is of major importance damaging a wide variety of food, fibre, oilseed, fodder and horticultural crops. The nuclear polyhedrosis virus of H. armigera (HaNPV ) is currently used for the management of H. armigera on chickpea, cotton, pigeon pea, tomato and sunflower. Mass production of Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (NPV) on commercial scale is restricted to in vivo procedures in host larvae which are obtained by   Field collection from cotton, pigeon pea and chickpea   H. armigera   Mass culturing in the laboratory in semisynthetic diet   H. armiger   Some small scale producers use field   collected larvae for mass production of NPV in spite of the following constraints.   Collection of a large number of larvae in optimum stage (late IV / early V instars) is time - consuming and can be expensive in terms of labour and transportation costs.   Wild populations of insects may carry disease causing organisms like microsporidians, cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus, stunt virus and fungal pathogens which will affect both virus production and quality.   Introduction of wild strains of NPV resulting in quality control problems.   Transportation of a large number of larvae with cannibalistic beha viour will be a difficult task. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 110 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management   Parasitized larvae collected from the field will die prematurely yielding little virus. Rearing of larvae in the natural host plant will involve frequent change of food at least once a day during the incubation period of 5 -9 days increasing the handling time and hence the cost. In order to reduce the cost, field collected larvae are released into semi synthetic diet treated with virus inoculum. Mass culturing of insects in semi synthetic diet involves high level of expertise, hygiene and cleanliness. Composition of semi -synthetic diet for H. armigera Component Quantity Chickpea flour 100g Yeast 30g Wesson s salt mix 07g Methyl Paraben 02g Sorbic acid 01g Ascorbic acid 03g Agar 13g Vanderzint vit. Sol ution 08ml Streptomycin sulphate 40mg Carbendazim 675mg Formalin 02ml Water 720ml Procedure for larval diet 1. Boil agar in 360ml of water, until completely dissolved. 2. Cook chickpeas in 360ml of water for 10 minutes and then transfer to a mixe r. 3. Add the agar to the chickpea flour and mix 4. The Wesson s salt mix, methyl paraben, sorbic acid and yeast are added together and homogenised for 5 minutes. 5. After the died has cooled to about 70oC, add the vitamin mix, ascorbic acid, carbendazim, formalin and streptomycin sulphate, and mix the died well for 5 minutes. 6. While still warm, dispense the diet into the rearing vessels, place (preferably) in laminar flow hood and leave to cool and solidify. 7. Cover the diet with clingfilm and store in a refrigerator until use. Production procedure The NPV of H. armigera is propagated in early fifth instar larvae. The virus is multiplied in a facility away from the host culture laboratory. The dose of the inoculum used is 5 x 105 polyhedral occlusion bodies (POB) in 1 0 ml suspension. The virus is applied on to the semisynthetic diet (lacking formaldehyde) dispensed previously in 5 ml glass vials. A blunt end polished glass rod (6 mm) is used to distribute the suspension containing the virus uniformly over the diet surf ace. Early fifth instar stage of larvae are released singly into the glass vials after inoculation and plugged with cotton and incubated at a constant temperature of 25oC in a laboratory incubator. When the larvae exhausted the feed, fresh untreated diet i s provided. The larvae are observed for the development of virosis and the cadavers collected carefully from individual bottles starting from fifth day. Approximately, 200 cadavers are collected per sterile cheese cup (300 ml) and the contents are frozen i mmediately. Depending upon need, cadavers are removed from the refrigerator and thawed very rapidly by agitation in water. Processing of NPV The method of processing of NPV CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 111 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management requires greater care to avoid losses during processing. The pellet finally collec ted is suspended in distilled water and made up to a known volume, which is necessary to calculate the strength of the POB in the purified suspension. Mass production of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant Introduction: Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant w as introduced into India in 1898 by Newport from Australia mainly for the control of C. viridis , but has established on many species of mealybugs and scales. It has been successfully used for the control of guava mealybugs, F. virgata , guava green shield scale, Chloropulvinaria psidii (Maskell), grapevine mealybug, M. hirsutus , coffee mealybug, Planoeoeeus citri (Risso), etc. Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Coleoptera Family: Coccinellida e SN specie s Host Crop Distributi on 1. Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant Mealy bugs, soft scales and some other soft bodied sucking pests Citrus, coffee, grapes, mango, several other fruit crops, ornamental s and cotton Widely distributed in India. Biolo gy of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant In the laboratory, the life cycle is completed in approximately 30 days. The premating and preoviposition periods are about 5 and 10 days respectively. The oviposition is about 10 days. Eggs are laid from late eveni ng to early morning. They are pale yellowish white, the surface being smooth and shiny. It is oval to cylindrical, both the ends beings smoothly rounded. Incubation period ranges from 5 to 6 days but extended in winter months. Viability of eggs is 90 to 10 0 per cent. The newly hatched grub is sluggish but becomes active after 3 to 4 hours. The tiny grub is pale greyish with white lines across the body along intra segmental regions. These white lines become prominent after few hours and white wax strands develop after a day. The grub has four larval instars, and the larval stage occupies about 20 days. They feed on all stages of mealy bugs. Duration of first, second, third and fourth instar grubs are 3 -4, 4, 4 -5- 7-8 days respectively. Grownup grubs are entire ly covered with white wax strands. When the grub is disturbed, it exudes a yellow fluid from the dorsal surface of the body for defensive purpose. The prepupal period is 2 to 4 days when it suspends feeding activities. The pupal period varies from 7 to 9 days. The adult spends about one day in the pupal case before it emerges. It is covered with a white powder like substance for a day. The male could be distinguished from the female by the colouration of first pair of legs. The first pair of legs in the ca se of male is brown and the latter two pairs being black, whereas in the female all the three pairs are black. Male to female ratio is 1 : 1. Adults are also known to attack and feed the mealy bugs. Longevity of adults ranges from 50 to 60 days and the fec undity is about 200 -220 eggs. Mass production of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant: Material required: Large sized cages, stainless steel stands, red pumpkins infested with mealy bugs, wax, carbendazim, burlap, camel hair brush, etc. Procedure: After 1 5 days of infestation of pumpkins with bugs they are exposed to a set of 100 beetles for 24 hrs. After exposing, the pumpkin is kept back in a cage as described for under production of M. hirsutus . The beetle during the period of exposure feed on mealy bug s as well as deposits their eggs singly or in groups of 4 -12. The grubs are visible in such cages within a week of exposure to beetles. The young grubs feed on eggs and small mealy bugs but as they grow they become voracious and feed on all stages of mealy bugs. For facilitating the pupation of grubs dried guava leaves or pieces of papers are kept at the base of each of the cages. The first beetle from the cages starts emerging on 30th day of exposure to C. montrouzieri adults. The beetles are collected dai ly and kept in separate cages for about 10 -15 days to facilitate completion of mating and pre -oviposition. The beetles are also CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 112 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management fed on diet containing agar powder (1 g), sugar (20 g), honey (40 cc) and water (100 cc). The adult diet is prepared by boiling sugar in 70 cc of water, adding 1 g agar, diluting 40 cc honey in 30 cc of water and adding to the sugar and agar mixture when it comes to boiling point. The hot liquid diet is kept on small white plastic cards in the form of droplets which get solidified on cooling. Such cards containing adult diet can be fed not only to C. montrouzieri but also to many other species of coccinellids. From each cage about 175 beetles are obtained. The emergence of the beetles is completed within 10days. Beetles can also be reared on Corcyra cephalonica eggs but empty ovisacs of Planococcus citri are to be kept for inducing egg laying by the beetles. Cryptolaemus is most active when the weather is sunny. A temperature of 22 to 25 C and a relative humidity of 70 to 80 % are optimal for egg laying. The beetle is not active when temperature drops to 16 C (diapause). Temperatures above 33 C confuse the beetles when looking for prey . Precaution: All due precautions should be taken to avoid scarcity of food for the grubs to avoid cannibalism by grubs. All the pumpkins showing signs of rotting should be properly incinerated. Maintenance of quality: Sufficient food should be provided to the predators. A temperature of 22 to 25 C and a relative humidity of 70 to 80 % are optimal and should be maintained. Absence of live product contaminants, maintenance of purity and viability of C. montrouzieri are of great importance in order to maintain the quality. Breeding with field collected wild population after every third generation is advis able. Sex ratio of 1:1 to be maintained during release. Transport: Cryptolaemus montrouzieri is supplied as adults packed per 25 or 500 pieces in plastic tubes with filter paper as carrier. If necessary, they can be stored for a short while at a temperatu re of 10 -15 C and RH >85% Field release: Before releasing in the field in the endemic areas, moderate to severely infested plants are marked. The plant trunks are ringed one foot away with a band of 5% diazinon granules 24 hrs before the release of the be etles; this stops the patrolling of ants on the trunk at least for 3 days. Dose: The general release rate recommended is 10 beetles or 50 grubs per infested plant and can be varied depending on the crop and the extent of infestation. For the suppression o f Rastrococcus iceryoides Green and other coccids including Nipaecoccus viridis infesting mango 20 -25 adults of C. montrouzieri are released on each of the infested mango tree. When applying Cryptolaemus in greenhouses, introduce 2 to 3 adults/m . Mainten ance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. No. of adults released per cage. 2. Date of release. 3. Different developmental periods. 4. Expected date of adult emergence. 5. Collection of adults. 6. Problems encountered with the culture during productio n. Biology of Host ( Maconellicoccus hirsutus ): The grapevine mealy bugs occur throughout the year on grapevine. The bugs are found the leaves, shoots, nodes, bunch and loose bark in the vine. The adult females are pinkish and covered with a mealy coat . The fecundity per adult is 350 -500 eggs. The orange coloured eggs hatch in 5 -10 days and the crawlers migrate and settle on places that support their food requirement. The crawlers CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 113 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management become sedentary as they advance in age. The multiplication rate of the b ugs is higher in summer months and life cycle gets prolonged during cooler months. Host production: Material required: Large sized cages, stainless steel stands, red pumpkins, wax, carbendazim, burlap, camel hair brush, etc. Procedure: Colony establish ment The colonies of the mealy bugs are established from field collection initially. Guava plantations, vineyards, croton plants, citrus and pomegranate gardens are good reservoirs of the mealy bug populations. From them a primary colony under quarantine i s established separately in the lab utilizing the quarantine facility. During this period the colony is purified to obtain mealy bug population free of attacks by parasitoids and scavenging ants. Culture maintenance The mealy bugs are cultured on pumpkin ( red) in the laboratory. It is very difficult to maintain the colony on the natural host plants. The selection of pumpkin is critical for successful development of mealy bugs. Fleshy pumpkins with intact peduncle and deep ridges and furrows of weight 2.5 kg devoid of wounds and mouldy patches are used for multiplication of the bugs. The pumpkins are soaked in carbendazim 0.5% for 1 min. and shade dried. The cut ends and wounds are plugged with molten wax. Along the furrows burlap is provided to facilitate se ttling of the crawlers. The pumpkins are placed in large sized cages over stainless steel stands. The cages are set up in ant proof conditions as the mealy bugs secrete honey dews which attract ants invariably. Ovisacs of healthy adults are collected and placed on fresh pumpkin in the laboratory individually. From them, the eggs are allowed to hatch and multiply. The crawlers move along the burlap and settle. In a month time, the mealy bugs begin to smother the entire surface of the pumpkin. From this stoc k, subsequent colonies are established. When the colony is in active growth period with breeding females, the ovisacs are collected with the help of camel hair brush and transferred to fresh pumpkins prepared as above. Precaution: During the mass product ion care is taken to avoid fungal invasion. The cages, steel ware and burlap used are sterilized using common bleach. Used pumpkin fruits with symptoms of mould invasion are disposed of immediately. The cages are to be set up in ant proof conditions. The c ulture should be free from parasitoid infestation. Maintenance of quality: Culture should be a pure one, free from live product contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. Date of infest ation with mealybug. 2. Scientific name of the species. 3. Source of mealy bug. 4. Different developmental periods. 5. Problems encountered with the culture during production. Reference: Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reare d arthropods. Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Arthropods.pp 171. National repository of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in biological control. Daya pullishing house. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 114 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Salih, M, Atlihan,R. and Karaca,I.2006. The life table of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) after different storage periods. Journal of Food, Agriculture & Environment. 4 (1): 282 -287. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Produc tion of Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). http://www.biobest.be http://www.nbaii.res.in http:// www. tnau.ac.in/ Mass production of Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricious) Introduction: Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricius) is a voracious predator of many immobile or slow -moving Homoptera, especially diaspine scales like sugarcane scale, Melanaspis glomerata (Green), California red scale, Aonidiella aurantii (Maskell), Green shield sca le, Chloropulvinaria psidii, coconut scale Aspidiotus destructor and coffee green scale, Coccus viridis (Green) and also aphids, aleyrodids, psyllids, pseudococcids, margarodids, coccids, etc. (Samways, 1984). This predator is encountered naturally in seve ral ecosystems where diaspine scales are abundant. It is native to the Indian subcontinent and has been introduced into USA for the biological control of Aonidiella aurantii (Maskell) on citrus, into Mauritius and Hawaii for Aspidiotus destructor Signoret on coconut and for other scale insects in several other countries. Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Coleoptera Family: Coccinellidae SN species Host Crop Distribution 1. Chilocoru s nigrita (Fabricio us) Scale insects, aphids, etc. Sugar cane, citrus, mango, brinjal, coconut,a reca nut, coffee, black pepper, etc. Widely distribute d in India 2. C. subindicu s Booth Diaspine scales Coconut, areca nut, coffee, black pepper, etc. southern India, Lakshadw eep Islands, etc. 3. C. circumdat us Schonherr Diaspine scales Coconut, areca nut, coffee, black pepper, etc. southern India Biology of Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricious): Length 3.2 -4.0 mm; width 2.9 -3.9 mm. Form subrounded, almost hemispherical and strongly convex. Head dull orange yellow. Pronotum dark pitchy brown to black in middle, paler on sides, anterolateral flaps orange yellow. Elytra black, shiny, with fine punctations. Ventral side including legs and inner margins of elytral epipleura orang e yellow to yellowish brown, outer margins of epipleura pitchy brown to black. Male genitalia and female spermatheca as illustrated. Larva greyish, oval in outline with numerous spiny, branched protuberances on dorsal side. Studies on biology of Chilocorus nigrita (Fab.) revealed that total developmental period of C. nigrita was shortest (26.13 days) on Melanaspis glomerata (Green) when compared with Aspidiotus destructor (Sign.) and Hemiberlesia lataniae (Signoret). The fecundity and longevity of C. nigrit a were found to be comparatively high with maximum suitability index (2.638) when reared on M. glomerata . Adults of C. nigrita was voracious than grub stage and each adult required 1195.65   23.01, 1183.33   52.04, 1095   67.27 number of M. glomerata, A. d estructor and H. lataniae while a total of 244.41   4.89, 228.73   6.52 and 219.73   3.26 number of scale insects were consumed by grub in its all four stages, respectively. Old grubs consumed more scales than the young grubs. Mass production of Chilocoru s nigrita: Material required: Cages, Honey -agar diet, plastic plates, cotton pads, sugarcane setts inoculated with scale insects, etc. Procedure: The predator can be multiplied on several diaspine scales ( Aonidiella aurantii (Maskell), Hemiberlesia lataniae (Signoret) and others. But is easily multiplied on M. glomerata. C. nigrita adults are released @ 100 per unit (cage or tray). Honey -agar is provided as supplementary food for adults. Honey -agar is prepared by adding 1000 cc water, 10 gm agar agar pow der, 200 gms sugar and 400 gms honey. The sugar is first added to 750 cc of water, once the sugar dissolves, add agar agar. The honey is mixed with 250 cc of water, when CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 115 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management sugar agar solution starts boiling honey solution is added and the mixture boiled for about half a minute. The hot adult diet is removed from the fire and small drops arranged on plastic plates or hard board or thick cards. On solidifying the diet is offered to the beetles. The first beetles start emerging from the multiplication cage in ab out 30 days time and the beetles continue to emerge for about a week. The adults are collected daily and the days collection kept in separate cages, 100 beetles each (A) where breeding of progenies has to continue, and 1000 beetles (B) each from where eggs are obtained for field release. The beetles start egg laying within 5 to 11 days. For field release (B) the eggs are obtained on cotton wool cut into squares, about 4 cm x 4 cm and laid over the feeding sites. The females readily oviposit on such pads. Thirty five 4 cm x 4 cm pads of the cotton are placed in each egg obtaining adult beetle cage (B) containing 1000 adults each and the pads with eggs removed every day. Each pad contains about 40 eggs (usually more). This beetle can also be cultured on Latani a Scale, Hemiberlesia lataniae (Signoret) on pumpkins. Precaution: Only 24 hr old eggs should be dispatched, so that by the time the shipment reaches the destination the eggs tend to hatch thus precluding egg parasitism in the field. The procedure adopted for producing C. nigrita could also be used for producing Pharoscymnus horni Weise, Sticholotis madagassa and Rhizobius (Lindorus) lopthanthae (Blaisdell) and other similar beetles feeding on diaspine scale insects. Many diaspine scales can also be multip lied on pumpkins. The larvae of certain coccinellid beetles particularly of R. lophanthae tend to develop cannibalism in the absence of suitable stage and sufficient number of the hosts (these conditions normally do not develop in commercial production uni ts where the production assembly is geared to give a definite turn out to meet the demand of the farmers). Maintenance of quality: Sufficient food should be provided to the predators. Absence of live product contaminants, maintenance of purity and viabilit y of the species are of great importance in order to maintain the quality. Breeding with field collected wild population after every third generation is advisable. Strict maintenance of hygienic condition. Transport: The egg containing pads in hard card b oard boxes or adults packed in plastic tubes with filter paper as carrier are readily transported to the release site. Field release: The pads are placed or distributed throughout the sugarcane field by locating the heavily infested focal points within th e field. The hatching grubs start feeding on the scale insects present in the vicinity and generation of the beetle develops in the sugarcane field. The beetles of the second generation which have developed in the sugarcane field disperse to feed on the po pulation of the scale insect in the area. Dose: In endemic areas 100 spots per hectare are selected and at each spot 10 pads containing eggs are placed over the scale infested canes. In areas where adult beetle release is preferred, release 1500 beetles o f C. nigrita and /or Pharoscymnus horni Weise per hectare at the first appearance of the pest. In Citrus : Ten adults / tree. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. No. of adults released per cage. 2. Date of release. 3. Different developmental periods. 4. Expected date of adult emergence. 5. Collection of adults. 6. Problems encountered with the culture during production. Biology of Host (Melanaspis glomerata (Gree) (Diaspididae: Hemiptera ): The adult female is soft bodied, small, disc lik e, eyeless and degenerated. Males are winged and short lived. The scales (protective covering) of males are usually oval and oblong whereas in case of females it is round and circular. Females are ovoviviparous and never come out from her scale covering. Adult males after coming out from under surface of the scale begin to move on the internodes in search of the female. After copulation female produces nymphs. Female is ovoviviparous and produces about 400 nymphs during her life time. The nymphs that hatch out inside body come out through the genital aperture of the female. The young tiny yellowish nymph which comes out from beneath the mother scale crawls on cane surface and settle down on one of the internodes. Nymphs insert its proboscis into the plant ti ssues and suck CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 116 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management the cell sap. Once it settles down never moves from that spot. Nymph secretes a protective covering (scale) around it -self inside which metamorphosis occurs and adults are formed. The pest remains active almost throughout the year and under South - Indian conditions 4 - 9 overlapping generations are completed in a year. The males complete their life cycle in about 20 -25 days whereas the females take about 40 -45 days for the same purpose. Host production: Material required: Sugarcane setts, form alin, Benlate, paraffin wax, plastic trays, piece of mosquito net, black cloth, cement pots, cages, iron frames. Procedure: M. glomerata is ovoviviparous in reproduction. Six to eight month old healthy canes without any fissures and with undamaged buds of susceptible varieties like Co671, Co4133 and Co740 are selected for culturing the scale insect. The cane pieces are cut into 40 -45 cm pieces bearing three internodes each. The sets are surface sterilized with formalin and 2% Benlate, shade dried and the cu t ends dipped in moulten paraffin wax to prevent fungal infection and drying. The sets are arranged in plastic trays (30X40X6.5 cm) the inner sides of which are painted black or in breeding cages 0.3 sq meter. The initial culture of the host insect is star ted by bringing cane scrapings bearing full grown scales from heavily infested fields. The scrapings are places over a piece of mosquito net helping them spread over prepared cane pieces horizontally. The trays are covered with a black cloth and fastened w ith a string. Similarly the cages are covered with black cloth to obtain better setting and good culture by creating dark conditions. After 48 hrs, the sets are rotated to ensure uniform infestation. Once pure culture is established, the subsequent infesta tion is obtained by placing the freshly prepared canes in close contact with well infested canes. After 72 hrs they are planted by removing the wax from one side in sterilized moist sand in cages or in cement pots 62X62X30 cm containing jungle soil. The pl anted sets are covered with polyvinyl cages 20 cm in height and 15 cm in diameter and covered with lid on which window is cut and fixed with net to provide aeration. The inoculated cane sets are placed in specially designed iron frames (45X35X20 cm) contai ning 5X5 cm squares and sterilized water. The water in the tray is changed once in two days. Precaution: The initial culture of M. glomerata collected from the field should be freed from all natural enemies. The sets used for producing should be disinfect ed and waxed before use. The shriveled sets if any should be discarded. Only highly susceptible cane varieties should be used to produce healthy scale insects in required quantity. Maintenance of quality: Culture should be a pure one, free from live produ ct contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. Date of infestation with scale insect. 2. Scientific name of the species. 3. Source of scale insect. 4. Different developmental periods. 5. Problems enc ountered with the culture during production. Reference : Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Art hropods.pp 171. Murali B. R.K. and Suresh K. 2006. Comparative biology and predatory potential of black beetle, Chilocorus nigrita (Fab.) on three scale insects. Journal of Entomological Research . 30(2): 159   164. National repository of natural enemies o f crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in biologica l control. Daya pullishing house. 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Samways, M.1. 1984. Biology and economic value of the scale predator Chilocorus nigritus (F.). (Coccinellidae). Biocontrol News and Information . 4: 91-105. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). http://www.ipcnet.org/n/bpd/scaleInsects/scaleInsec ts_control.htm http://www.nbaii.res.in http://tnau.ac. in http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 117 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Mass production of Scymnus coccivora Ayyar Introduction: Species of Scymnus are well known in tropical areas as predators of scale insects, mealybugs, aphids and other soft -bodied arthropods. Scymnus species occur widely in tropical areas and have been used in many classical biological control programmes. According to CABI BIOCAT database, more than 50 species of this genus have been introduced in various countries to control 27 species of homopteran pest s belonging to 6 families, mainly Pseudococcidae (48.1%), Diaspididae (14.8%), Aldegidae (14.8%), Aleyrodidae (11.1%), Aphididae (7.4 %) and Coccidae (3.7%). Scymnus spp. have been used most successfully in biological programmes against mealybugs (Pseudoco ccidae) and woolly aphids (Adelgidae). Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Coleoptera Family: Coccinellidae S N speci es Host Crop Distrib ution 1. Scymnus coccivora Ayyar Mealybus, Scale insect s, aphids, whitefly, mites, etc. brinjal, cotton, guava, mango, mulberry, teak, citrus, grapevine, etc. Widely distribut ed through out India. 2. brunnescens Mealybugs, aphids, mites, midges, white fly, etc. brinjal, cotton, guava, mango, mulberry, teak, citr us, grapevine, etc. Widely distribut ed through out India. 3. nubilus Mulsant Mealybugs, aphids, mites, midges, white fly, etc. brinjal, cotton, guava, mango, mulberry, teak, citrus, grapevine, etc. Widely distribut ed through out India. 4. latemaculatus M otschu lsky Aphids, mealy bugs, scales. brinjal, cotton, guava, mango, mulberry, teak, citrus, grapevine, etc. Widely distribut ed through out India. 5. castaneus Sicard Aphids, Mealybug. brinjal, cotton, guava, mango, mulberry, teak, citrus, grapevine, etc. Widely distribut ed through out India. Biology of Scymnus coccivora Aiyar Length 1.70 -1.90 mm, width 1.20 -1.30 mm. Form elongate oval, moderately convex. Ground colour pale golden yellow to yellowish brown, with dark purplish brown markings on elytra. Elytra with an hour glass -shaped longitudinal marking in basal half, which sometimes appears as two distinct markings; two small circular spots present in posterior half; elytral pattern variable, sometimes with only posterior spots present or uniformly yellowish bro wn, completely devoid of markings. Antenna 11 -segmented. Prosternal intercoxal process with a pair of carinae, broader towards CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 118 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management posterior. Postcoxal line complete and semicircular, area adjacent to postcoxal line smooth. Male genitalia (Figs. 4 -6) as illust rated. Larva with dorsal surface covered with white waxy filaments. The duration of life stages was shorter during summer (15.65 days in April) and longer during winter (26.52 days in December). The male to female ratio of beetle population was 1:0.95. Eac h female S. coccivora laid 84.7 eggs on an average when reared on grape mealybug, Maconellicoccus hirsutus Green. The percentage hatchability of the eggs was 89.86. The longevity of male and female beetles, respectively was 61.7 and 66.8 days when fed on g rape mealybug. The adults were the potential feeders of mealybug eggs when compared with the grubs. Adult consumed 864.4 eggs, whereas larval consumption was 314.2 eggs during the life time. Preference for feeding was evident with M. hirsutus followed by Ferrisia virgata and Plunococcus spp. The egg, grub, prepupal and pupal stages occupy 4.13   4.20, 9.15   11.75, 1.25   1.40, 5.25   5.60 days respectively when the coccinellid is reared on different stages of M. hirsutus . The predatory grub consume 307.7 eggs or 62.2 nymphs or 6.55 adult females of M. hirsutus in confinement. Mass production of Scymnus coccivora : Material required: Rearing cages, Red pumpkins, mealy bugs, motorised aspirator. Procedure: S. coccivora is multiplied on the ripe pumpkins infested by Planococcus citris as described under P.citri. The 15   20 day old mealy bugs are exposed to adult beetles. The beetles distribute their eggs singly or occasionally more than one egg is laid at a place. The eggs laid hatch in 4 -5 days. The larval and pupal development is completed in 10 and 7 days respectively. The first adult emerges in 20 days time. Adult S. coccivora are harvested with a motorised aspirator within 4 -7 weeks after initial oviposition. The beetles emerging daily are caged, allowed to mate and pass their preoviposition period. The beetles are then either field relased or used for continuation of culture. Precaution: All due precautions should be taken to avoid scarcity of food for the grubs to avoid cannibalism by grubs. All the pu mpkins showing sign of rotting should be properly incinerated. Apart from the precautions required for handling pumpkins and the parasitoid, ringing the trunks leaving one foot away with a band of 5% diazinon granules before release of parasitoid should be adopted. Maintenance of quality: Sufficient food should be provided to the predators. Culture should be a pure one. Absence of live product contaminants, maintenance of purity and viability of the species are of great importance in order to maintain the quality. Breeding with field collected wild population after every third generation is advisable. Maintain strict hygienic conditions. Transport: S. coccivora is supplied as adults packed per certain number in plastic tubes with filter paper as carrier. Field release: Two releases of Scymnus coccivora @ 10 grubs per infested tree at monthly interval for suppressing the population of mealy bugs in fruit trees. Dose: Release predatory lady bird beetles Scymnus coccivora @ 250 adult beetles/ac, or 10 S. coccivora beetles per tree or 600 -2500 per hectare are released. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. No. of adults released per cage. 2. Date of release. 3. Different developmental periods. 4. Expected date of adult emergence. 5. Collection of adults. 6. Problems encountered with the culture during production. Biology of Host ( Planococcus citri ): Eggs are deposited as white cottony masses called ovisacs giving the appearance of cotton spread. The glossy, light yellow eggs are oval a nd approximately 0.3 mm long. A female can lay from 300 to 600 eggs in her life period, which are deposited in groups of 5 to 20. Depending on the season, egg hatch may occur after 6 - 10 days or several weeks. First instar female and male nymphs CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 119 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management are calle d crawlers. The nymphs take 6 to 10 weeks to reach maturity. The nymphs are yellow, oval - shaped with red eyes, and covered with white waxy particles. Female nymphs have four instars. Males differ greatly; they have three instars and a pre - pupal stage. It i s only the males that can produce a cottony -appearing cocoon and pupate. Adult size ranges in length from 3 mm (females) to 4.5 mm (males). The females are wingless, white to light brown in color, with brown legs and antennae. The body of adult females is coated with white wax and bears a characteristic faint gray stripe along their dorsal side. Females can live for up to 29 days depending on the host plant. Mealybugs remain motile throughout their life cycle, with the exception of the male pupa. Host prod uction: Material required: Wooden cage, white cloth or with nylon mesh, plastic ring, red pumpkin. Procedure: P.citri is produced on ripe pumpkins. The pumpkins are selected with ridges and groves with a small stalk which makes the handling easy. The pumpkins are thoroughly washed with tap water to remove dust particles. The pumpkins are then dipped in 0.1% (one gm/litre) solution of Benlate or Bavistin to kill all the fungal rot pathogens. The injured pumpkins are discarded or the wounds are plugged with hot paraffin wax. Once the pumpkins get completely dried under shade. Each pumpkin is infested with P.citri crawlers (1st instar mealy bugs) maintained in infestation room (in case the crawlers are not available, ovisacs of the mealy bug are placed over the pumpkin the crawlers emerging form ovisacs then settle on pumpkin). Each of the infested pumpkin is placed in 30 cm3 wooden cage all sides of which are covered by white cloth or with nylon mesh. The cage has several variations but the one with slanting top and fixed with a slanting glass top and front sleeve has become quite popular. The pumpkin in the cage is kept from the front door opening on a round plastic ring. Such pumpkins are covered with mealy bugs in 15 days and the mealy bugs mature in anothe r 12-15 days time. Precaution: Only the best quality of pumpkins should be selected for mealy bug rearing programme. Any pumpkin showing signs of rotting should be discarded immediately. Surface sterilize the pumpkin by dipping in a solution of 0.1% Benla te or Bavistin to kill all the fungal rot pathogens. A sequence of pumpkin infestation cycle by mealy bugs has to be maintained to ensure availability of right stage of mealy bugs for exposing to the predators and parasitoids. Maintenance of quality: Culture should be a pure one, free from live product contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. Date of infestation with mealybug. 2. Scientific name of the species. 3. Source of mealy bug. 4. Differ ent developmental periods. 5. Problems encountered with the culture during production. Reference: Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working G roup on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Arthropods.pp 171. National repository of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in biological control. Daya pullishing house. 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of Natural Enemies. Project Direc torate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). http://ecoport.org/ http://entnemdept.ufl.edu/ http://www.nbaii.res.in CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 120 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Mass production of Anthocorid bugs Introduction: Anthocorid bugs, particularly many species of the genus Orius (Heteroptera, Anthocoridae) are important beneficial insects for various agro systems feeding primarily upon thrips, aphids, leafhoppers, psyllids, spider mites, eggs and young larvae of several crop pests. Cardiastethus pygmaeus Poppiu s, C. affinis Poppius and C. exiguus Poppius are key predators of coconut leaf caterpillars Opisina arenosella Walker and Xylocoris (Arrostelus) flavipes (Reuter) is associated with pest of stored grains/commodities. Taxonomy, Identification and distribu tion of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Hemiptera Family: Anthocoridae. S N species Host Crop Distribut ion 1. Orius tantillus (Motschul sky) thrips, mites, Helicoverp a armigera, etc Sunflo wer, cotton, chillies, marigol d, etc. Widely distribut ed in India. 2. Cardiastet hus exiguous Poppius Opisina arenosella coconut Widely distribut ed in India. 3. Affinis Poppius Opisina arenosella coconut Widely distribut ed in India. 4. pygmaeus Poppius Opisina arenosella coconut Widely distribut ed in India. 5. Xylocoris flavipes (Reuter) Ephestia kuehniella, Oryzaephil us spp., Tribolium castaneum, etc. Stored grains Widely distribut ed in India. Biology of Anthocorid bugs: In most species the eggs hatch in 4 -7 days and there are 5 -6 nymphal instars, the duration for each instar being passed in 3 -6 days. The adult males for 4-45 and female for 6 -61 days. Each female is capable of producing about 150 eggs. Mass production of Anthocorid bugs: Material required: Breedin g cage, polystyrene wool, condense d milk, water. Procedure: Orius spp. Are reared in a specially designed cage which is made by converting a plastic playing card box into a breeding cage. Windows are cut on the top and bottom are replaced by plastic net to ensure proper aeration. On one lateral side a small window is cut which is replaced by a removable feeding pad. On the opposite side a similar window is cut and replaced by removable polystyrene wool. Once the cage are ready, twenty pairs of Orius spp. are introduced by removing one of the lateral opening. The food is provided (one part of water mixed with two parts of the condensed milk) on the lateral pad. The eggs are laid on the polystyrenes pad which is replaced daily with a fresh pad. The food also replaced daily and once in a week the entire assembly is changed and replaced by a fresh sterilized unit. A number of such units are set for rearing the required numbers of bugs. The cages are further stacked in a cage where a temperature of 25 - 26 C and relative humidity of 70 -80% is main tained. The predatory bugs could also be reared on Corcyra eggs. Precaution: Among the precautions, the regular collection of bug eggs will avoid cannibalism and observance of strict hygienic conditions will prevent the attack of moulds. Maintenance of quality: Check the quality of the culture. If the fecundity is reduced, rear at least the stock culture on Corcyra eggs or Spodoptera eggs to bring back the original productivity. Sufficient food should be offered to the predators. Maintain strict hygieni c condition. Breeding with field collected wild population of the same species after every third generation is advisable. Transport: Bugs are packed in plastic containers provided with sufficient Corcyra eggs and corrugated paper sheet. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 121 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Field release Anthocorid bugs have gained prominence recently. Their conservation and application in cotton ecosystem will be big boost in protection technology for bollworms, aphids, thrips and mites on cotton and thrips , mites, lepidopterans particularly Helicoverpa arm igera on sunflower. Cardiastethus exiguus can be utilized against coconut black -headed caterpillar, Opisina arenosella Walker, along with C. affinis Poppius, which it closely resembles. Dose: The dosage of release is being refined but coinciding the relea se of 50,000 bugs in 100 spots with initiation of flowering in cotton and 2 bugs per sunflower head will give effective suppression. In case of Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius three to six releases of 50 adults or nymphs per palm at weekly intervals are reco mmended with the first release coinciding with egg laying by O. arenosella. Maintenance of history sheet The following information is furnished. 1. Date of egg laying. 2. Date of hatching. 3. Date of moulting of each instar. 4. Problems encountered with the basin dur ing production 5. Biology of Host 6. 6. Host production: (add Photograph/ Sketch where ever required) Reference: Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Arthropods.pp 171. Manley, G. V. 1976. Immature Stages and Biology of Orius tantillus Hemiptera Heteroptera Anthocoridae Inhabiting Rice Fields In West Malaysia. Entomological News. 87(3&4):103 - 109. National repository of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indi an insect predators in biological control. Daya pullishing house. 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). Thomas, J. M. G., Shirk P. D. and Shapiro, J. P. 2012. Mass rearing of a tropical minute pirate bug, Orius pumilio (Hemiptera: Anthocoridae). Florida Entomologist . 95(1):202 -204. http://www.nba ii.res.in Adult dorsal view Eggs Orius (Dimorphella) tantillus (Motschulsky) Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius Cardiastethus pygmaeus CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 122 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Mass production of Reduviid predators Introduction: Reduviids or assassin bugs are important natural enemies of Helicoverpa armigera and several other pests. On pigeonpea Coranus sp. atricapillus Distant and C. spinicutis Reuter, Rhinocorus marginatus (Fabricius), R. fuscipes Stal and several other species have been recorded feeding on H. armigera . Similarly these species have also been recorded on tobacco Coranus sp. atricapillus and Harpector costalis Stal are particularly abundant. It is quite interesting because on these two crops the diversity of natural enemies of H. armigera is not high as compared to other crops. The high longevity and prolonged predation is an advantage which could be harnessed by incorporating the reduviid bugs in biointensive IPM in relatively less preferred (by other natural enemies) crop ecosystems such as chickpea, pegeionpea and tobacco as well as in stable ecosystems such as orchards, forests etc. Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Hemiptera Family: Reduviidae S N species Host Crop Distrib ution 1. Isyndus heros (Fabr icius) Generalist predator. Pulses Widely distrib uted in India. 2. Endochus inornatus Stal. Generalist predator. Pulses Widely distrib uted in India. 3. Rhynocoris marginatus Fab Generalist predator. Host includes H.armiger a, S.litura, A.craccivo ra, etc . cotton, soybean, tomato and groundnu t, pigeon pea Widely distrib uted in India. 4. R. fuscipes Generalist predator. Cotton, Okra, Ground nut, pigeon pea Widely distrib uted in India. 5. R. longifrons Generalist predator. Cotton, Okra, Widely distribPulses uted in India. Biology of Reduviid predators: Most of the reduviids have fairly long life cycle; the egg, nymphal, adult male and female period varies from 8 -11, 42 -47, 85 -125 and 85 -137 days respectively. The female of different species lays eggs in batche s of 10 -28. The total fecundity varies from 42 -205 eggs. Each individual species is capable of consuming 63 to 790 larvae of H. armigera or Spodoptera litura in its life time. Mass production of Reduviid predators: Material required: Card sheets (10X3.5 cms), cellotape, jars (15 cm dia and 25 cm height), fourth and fifth instar Cocryra larvae, cotton, plastic vials (30 ml volume). Procedure: This technique was developed at IARI. In this technique, the head and thorax of Corcyra cephalonica larvae are fir mly affixed on strips of card sheets (10X3.5 cms) using cellotape. This prevents the C. cephalonica larvae from webbing silk, cannibalism and spoiling the culture of the bugs. The larvae once fixed do not require any food, but the predators are attracted t o strike on the wagging abdomen of fixed C. cephalonica larvae. The mass multiplication is done in jars (15 cm dia and 25 cm height) at room temperature (24 -30oC). Each card sheet can accommodate 70 C. cephalonica larvae and 25 pairs of reduviids are relea sed per jar. Food is changed every alternate day. The egg batches laid by the female bugs in the laboratory were incubated in moist cotton swabs in small plastic vials (30 ml volume) to provide humidity. Rediviids - Rhynocoris spp., Acanthaspis spp., Sphede nolestes varibilis , Acanthaspis quineuespinosa (Fabricius), Brassivola hystrix Distant, Coranus sp., Endochus inornatus Stal., Endochus umbrinus , E. parvispinus Distant, Haematorrhopus linnaei Stal, H. nigroviolaceus Reuter, Irantha armipes Stal, Isyndus heros (Fabricius) and few others could be multiplied by adopting this technique. Endochus inornatus is the best predator followed by Coranus sp. Could be used against pests of pulses with a provision for natural or semi - permanent refuges for surviving the o dd seasons. Precaution: CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 123 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Maintenance of sanitation has maximum relevance because of the long life cycle and adult longevity. In released fields wherever feasible, natural or semipermanent refuge should be made available for surviving the odd season. Maint enance of quality: Check the quality of the culture. Check for the fecundity of the species. Sufficient food should be offered to the predators. Maintain strict hygienic condition. Breeding with field collected wild population of the same species after eve ry third generation is advisable. Transport: Packed in plastic containers provided with sufficient larval cards. Field release: R.fuscipes & R. longifrons have been successfully utilized in cotton in India. R. marginatus and R. fuscipes have been success fully utilized in groundnut in India. Coranus sp. could be released for the suppression of H. armigera infesting pulses. Coranus sp. And Harpactor costalis could be released in tobacco ecosystem for the suppression of H. armigera and other pests. About to hatch eggs of these predators pasted on cards could be uniformly distributed in endemic areas and nymphal instars may be released under the foliage with the help of small wet paintbrushes. Dose: 20000 nymphal instars per hectare. 50000 eggs per hectare. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished.   Date of preparation of larval cards.   Date of hatching.   Date of moulting of each instar.   Number of generations.   Problems encountered with the basin during production Rhynocoris fusc ipes Rhynocoris longifrons Rhynocoris marginatus Isyndus heros (Fabricius) Irantha armipes (St l) Acanthaspis sp. Biology of Host ( Corcyra cephalonica ): The eggs are oval and measure 0.5 x 0.3 mm. The white surface is sculptured and has a sho rt nipple -like process at one end. The larvae are generally creamish   white except for the head capsule and the prothoracic tergite, which are brown. There are well -developed prolegs on abdominal segments 3 -6 and 10. A fully matured larva measures 15 mm. The last -instar larva spins a closely woven, very tough, double -layered cocoon in which it develops into a dark -brown pupa. The anterior portion of the cocoon has a line of weakness through which the adult emerges. The adults are small. The hind -wings are pale-buff, and the fore -wings are mid -brown or greyish -brown with thin vague lines of darker brown colour along the wing veins. The males are smaller than the females. Sexual activity usually begins shortly after adult emergence. There is a pre -oviposition period of about 2 days. Egg-laying mainly occurs during the night. The greatest numbers are laid on the second and third days after emergence, although oviposition may continue throughout life. Eggs take about 2 -3 days to hatch. Optimum conditions for larval development of C. cephalonica are 30   CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 124 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management 32.50C and 70 per cent RH, at which, the period from egg hatch to adult emergence is only 26 -27 days. There is considerable variation in the number of larval instars; however, males generally have 7 and females ha ve 8. The last -instar larvae pupate within the food. The adults emerge through the anterior end of the cocoon, where there is a line of weakness. The sex ratio is 1:1. The adult moth is nocturnal and is most active at nightfall. Host production: Material required: Absorbent cotton Storage racks Blotting paper Streptomycin sulphate Broken Pearl millet grain Rubber band Camel hair brush Measuring cylinder Enamel Tray Oven Honey Home milling machine Markin cloth Sieves Mosquito net Formaldehyde 40% Moth aspirator (collector) Filter paper Oviposition drums Moth scale egg separator Plastic basin Face masks Shoe brush Storing drums Soap Ground nut kernel Specimen tube Sulphur (WP) Yeast Coarse weighing balance Procedure: Preparation of rearing basins The basins (16  dia) used for Corcyra multiplication are thoroughly cleaned with 0.5% detergent wash and rinsing in tap water followed by wiping with dry, clean   used towel and shade drying. Whenever the trays are emptied after a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning steps are repeated. Preparation of bajra medium for Corcyra a) The required quantities of bajra grains are coarsely milled and brok en into 2 -3 pieces in a milling machine. The broken grains are heat sterilized at 1000C for 1 hour to eliminate the residual population of stored product insects viz., Rhizopertha dominica , Sitotroga cerealella , Tribolium castaneum and fungal contaminants. Upon sterilization the grains are cooled under fan in a clean area. The grains are then transferred to plastic basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. b) Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken using a pounding machine or a mechanical blender (domestic mixer). Then 1 00 g of the broken kernel is transferred to each basin and the contents are hand mixed thoroughly. c) Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sulfur is added @ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% streptomycin sulfate and mi xing of the contents follows this. This medium is used for rearing Corcyra larvae. d) The number of basins required for egg infestation is calculated and the medium is prepared accordingly. Preparation of Corcyra eggs The primary source of Corcyra eggs is rep uted laboratories, commercial producers for bulk preparation. If it is intended to begin the production with nucleus colony, the adult moths can be collected from warehouses where the food materials are stored. a) The eggs used for building up the colony of Corcyra have to be free from contaminants like the moth scales and broken limbs and not exposed to UV light. b) The collections of overnight laid eggs are measured volumetrically to ascertain the number of trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of eggs is known to contain approximately 16000   18000 eggs. Infestation of medium with eggs The overall production scheme involves initial infestation of the Pearl millet medium with Corcyra eggs in desired quantities. This is accomplished by sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc eggs of Corcyra is infested. The basins are then covered with clean markin cloth and held tightly with rubber fasteners. The basins are carefully transferred to the racks. Handling the trays during larval development The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin to feed the fortified Bajra medium. At this stage, light webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae grow up they move down. During this period the larvae are a llowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. Handling of adults The adults begin to emerge in 28 -30 days after infestation of the eggs. The adults can be seen on the inner side of the markin cloth. They are either aspirated with mechanical moth collector or collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 125 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management is carried out in a tent of mosquito net. This prevents the large -scale escape of the moths, which if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and spoil the grains stored by laying eggs. Workers involve d in the collection of moths should wear face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of scales. The moths collected are transferred to the oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time. The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made of galvanized iro n. The drums rest on tripod frames with legs of height 5cm. The bottoms of the drums are provided with wire meshes that enable collection of eggs. The walls of the drums have two vents (ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The vents are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of the drums have handles besides slots for introducing the moths and adult feed. The oviposition drums filled in a day are maintained for four to seven successive days for egg collection after which are emptied and cleaned for nex t cycle of use. The adults are provided feed containing honey solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 ml honey with 50 ml water and 5 capsules of vitamin E (Evion). The feed is stored in refrigerator and used as and when required. Piece of cotto n wool tied with a thread is soaked in the solution and inserted into the drum through the slot at the top. From a basin, moths can be collected upto 90 days after which the number of moths emerging dwindles down and keeping the basins is not economical fo r the producer. Handling of eggs The moths lay the eggs in large numbers loosely. The scales and broken limbs are also found in larger quantities along with the eggs. They cause potential hazard to the workers after years of working in Corcyra laboratory. To minimize the risk of scales freely floating in the air, the oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter paper in enamel trays which trap effectively the scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the workers comfort. Daily morning the oviposition drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are cleaned gently with a shoe brush so that the eggs and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the mesh are collected along with those on the filter paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling the eggs on filter paper to another container. Then they are passed to sieves in series and finally clean eggs are collected. The eggs are quantified in measuring cylinders and used for building up the stocks and natural enemy production. About 100 pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 4 days laying period inside the oviposition drums. From each basin an average of 2500 moths are collected. Hence from each basin 18.00   20.00 cc of eggs can be obtaine d in 90 days. Precaution: Bacterial diseasemay affect the Corcyra culture. To control this, Streptomycin sulphate is added to the crushed graind at the rate of 0.2 gm/kg and mixed thoroughly. Occationally the mite Pyemotes ventricosus (Newport) may contam inate the culture and affect egg -laying and larval development. If mites are observed, thye racks, cages, boxes etc. should be disinfected with formalin and placed in the sun for six hours. Boxes containing developing larvae should be dusted with sulphur s o that a thin layer of sulphur is present over the grains. If infestation is severe, it may be necessary to treat with the acaricide dicofol (Kelthane). For this, muslin sheets are dipped in a 0.05% solution of dicifol and air dried for a couple of hours. These sheets are spread over the grains in boxes. Mites coming in contact with the treated cloth are killed rapidly. Bracon hebetor Say must be kept away from infesting the culture of C. cephalonica. Maintenance of quality: Accurate information is needed on the history of individual basins. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. Date of egg infestation 2. Date of preparation of feed 3. Source of egg 4. Expected date of adult emergence 5. Daily collection of moths 6. Problems encountered w ith the basin during production Reference: Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Arthropods.pp 17 1. National repository of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj K. 2002. Small scale laboratory rearing of a reduviid predator , Rhynocoris marginatus Fab. (hemiptera: reduviidae) on corcyra CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 126 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management cephalonica Stainton larvae by larval card method. Journal of Central European Agriculture. 3 (2): 137 -147. Sahayaraj, K. and Martin P. 2003. Assessment of Rhynocoris marginatus (Fab.) (Hemiptera: Reduviidae) as augmented control in groundnut pests. Journal of Central European Agriculture (online), 4 (2): 104 -110. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in biological control. Daya p ullishing house. 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). http://www.nbaii.res.in Mass production of Chrysopid predetors Introduction: In India, 65 species of chrysopids belonging to 21 genera have been recorded from various crop ecosystems. Some species are distributed widely and are important n atural enemies for aphids and other soft bodied insects. Amongst them, the green lacewing Chrysoperla carnea is the most common. C. carnea is now used extensively all over the country. It is being mass produced primarily on the eggs of rice grain moth, Corcyra cephalonica in India. It is being mass released in the field for the control of aphids, white flies, mealy bugs and eggs and young larvae of lepidepteron pests. The Chrysoperla predetors may be used on cotton, groundnut, pulses, vegetables, ornamental s and several other crops. They also feed on the eggs and freshly hatched larvae of Helicoverpa armigera and such other caterpillar pests. They are capable of bringing down the population of the pest drastically. For mass production of chrysoperla , an efficient rearing technique is required. Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of common species Kingdom: Animalia Class: Insecta Order: Neuroptera Family: Chrysopidae S N species Host Crop Distribu tion 1. Chrysoperla carnea Generali st predator of soft Cotton, pulses, vegetabl es, Widely distribut ed in India bodied insects and lepidopt erous pests. Tobacco , oilseeds, fruit crops, plantatio n crops, etc. 2. Mallada boninensis (Okamoto) Generali st predator of soft bodied insects and lepidopt erous pests. Cotton, pulses, vegetabl es, tobacco, oilseeds, fruit crops, plantatio n crops,et c. Widely distribut ed in India 3. C. crassinervis Esben - Peterson Generali st predator of soft bodied insects and lepidopt erous pests. Cotton, pulses, vegetabl es, tobacco, oilseeds, fruit crops, plantatio n crops,et c. Widely distribut ed in India Biology of Chrysoperla carnea : Chrysoperla are generally green in colour, varying in length from 1.0 -1.3 cm. The pre - oviposition period lasts 3 to 7 days. Adults start laying eggs from 5th day onw ards and peak egg - laying period is between 9 and 23 days after emergence. The male longevity is 30 -35 days. Adult female lay eggs of 600 -800 eggs/female on an average. The eggs are stalked and green in colour. The eggs are laid singly or in clusters. Egg stage lasts 3 -4 days. The larva has 3 instars and after 8 -10 days it will form cocoons. Adult emerges in 5-7 days from cocoons. Mass production of Chrysoperla carnea : Material required: Facilities like rearing room (6 x 6 m), slotted angle iron racks, wo rk tables, plastic louvers 60 x 22 cms with 2.5 cm cubical cells, acrylic sheets to cover the louvers, glass vials, adult oviposition cages (45 x 30 x 30 cms), plastic louvers, plastic containers, scissors and brushes, cotton wool, tissue CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 127 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management paper, sponge, fr uctose, protinex, honey, yeast, castor pollen etc. are required for the mass rearing of chrysopids. Procedure: In mass production, the adults are fed on various types of diets. The larvae are either reared in plastic tubes or empty injection vials or in groups in large containers or in individual cells. The most common method for the production of chrysopids is detailed below. The adults are collected daily and transferred to pneumatic glass troughs or G.I. round troughs (30 cm x 12 cm). Before allowing the adults, the rearing troughs are wrapped inside with black sheet which act as egg receiving card. About 250 adults (60% females) are allowed into each trough and covered with white nylon or georgette cloth secured by rubber band. On the cloth outside th ree bits of foam sponge (2 sq.in) dripped in water is kept. Besides an artificial protein rich diet is provided in semisolid paste form in three spots on the cloth outside. This diet consists of one part of yeast, fructose, honey, Proteinex R and water in the ratio 1:1:1:1. The adults lay eggs on the black sheet. The adults are collected daily and allowed into fresh rearing troughs with fresh food. From the old troughs, the black paper sheets along with Chrysopa eggs are removed. Storage and destalking of eggs The brown paper sheet kept inside the adult rearing troughs contain large number of eggs each laid on a stalk or pedicel. As such the sheets are stored at 10oC in B.O.D. incubator or refrigerator for about 21 days. When the eggs are required for cultu ring or for field release the egg sheets are kept at room temperature for a day and the eggs during this period turn brown and hatch on 3 days later. The first larvae are either taken for culture or for recycling or for field release. Group rearing of gru bs It is done in GI round basins (28 cm dia) @ 250 larvae/basin, covered with markin cloth. The eggs of Corcyra cephalonica is given as feeding material for the larvae in the laboratory. For rearing 500 Chrysopa larvae the total quantity of Corcyra eggs re quired is 22 cc @ 5 cc/feeding for five feedings in alternate days. The Chrysopa larvae pupate into round white coloured silken cocoons in 10 days. The cocoons are collected with fine brush and transferred into 1 lit plastic containers with wire mesh windo w for emergence of adults. From the cocoons, pale green coloured adults with transparent lace like wings emerge in 9 -10 days. Individual rearing of grubs In the first step of larval rearing, 120 three day old chrysopid eggs are mixed with 0.75 ml of Corcy ra eggs (the embryo of Corcyra eggs are inactivated by keeping them at 2 feet distance from 15 watt ultraviolet tube light for 45 minutes) in a plastic container (27x18x6 cms). On hatching, the larvae start feeding. On 3rd day the larvae are transferred to 2.5 cm cubical cells of plastic louvers @ one per cell. Each louver can hold 192 larvae. Corcyra eggs are provided in all the cells of each louver by sprinkling through the modified salt shaker. Feeding is provided in two doses. First feeding of 1.5 ml Corcyra eggs for 100 larvae and second feeding of 2 ml for 100 larvae with a gap of 3-4 days is done. Total quantity of Corcyra eggs required for rearing 100 chrysopid larvae is 4.25 ml. The louvers are secured on one side by orgami or brown paper sheet and after transfer of larvae covered with acrylic sheet and clamped. Orgami or brown paper is used for facilitating pupation and clear visibility of eggs. The louvers are stacked in racks. One 2m x 1m x 45 cms angle iron rack can hold 100 louvers containing 19 ,200larvae. Cocoons are collected after 24 hours of formation (when they get hardened) by removing orgami or paper from one side. The cocoons are placed in adult oviposition cages for emergence (Adults are sometimes allowed to emerge in louvers and release d on glass window panes from where they are collected using suction pumps). Precaution: Chrysopid eggs should be packed in plastic jars with Corcyra eggs, paper strips should be provided to minimize contact and cannibalism between Chrysopid larvae in cas e larvae emerge during transit Release should be made in early hours in the morning to allow larvae to settle on crop canopy. Chrysopid larvae should be released in recommended numbers on crop, but on fruit crops, release should be made on infested plants/ trees only. Do not use pesticides in the field where predators are released. In case need arises use selective/safer pesticides and maintain a waiting period of atleast 10 -15 days before making the release. Do not release chrysopids in egg stage as they may get parasitized in the field by egg parasitoids or may be eaten by other predators. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 128 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Mallada boninensis and M. astur larvae carry trash on their body. Do not disturb this trash, the disturbance could injure the larvae. Maintenance of quality: Check the q uality of the produce (each lot). If the fecundity is reduced, rear at least the stock culture on aphids to bring back the original productivity. Sufficient food should be provided to the predators. Absence of live product contaminants, maintenance of puri ty and viability of Chrysopids are of great importance in order to maintain the quality. Breeding with field collected wild population after every third generation is advisable. Transport: Chrysopid eggs should be packed in plastic jars with Corcyra eggs, paper strips should be provided to minimize contact and cannibalism between chrysopid larvae in case larvae emerge during transit. Field release: Normally, chrysopids are recommended for use against different crop pests @ 50,000 or 1,00,000 1st instar la rvae/hectare, 4 -6 larvae/plant or 10 -20 larvae/fruit plant are released. Depending on the situation, two releases are recommended. They are released on the plants along with saw dust, or dropped from the corrugated paper strips. Dose: Crop/Pest Species/ N umbers released Cotton Old world bollworm Helicoverpa (=Heliothis) armigera Spotted/spiny boll worms Earias spp. Pink bollworm Pecticophora gossypiella Whitefly Bemista tabaci Aphid Aphis gossypii Mallada boninensis or Chrysoperla carnea @ 50,000/ha twice during the season with a gap of 15 days. Tobacco Aphid Myzus persicae Tobacco caterpillar Spodoptera litura White fly Bemisia tabaci Chry soperla carnea / Apertochrysa crassinervis @ 50,000/ ha or 6 larvae per plant twice during the season with an int erval of 15 days. Sunflower Head borer Helicoverpa armigera Chrysoperla carnea @ 50,000/ ha 1st instar larvae twice during the Aphid Aphis sp. season with an interval of 15 days. Groundnu t Aphid Aphis craccivora Chrysoperla carnea @ 50,000/ ha 1st instar larvae twice during the season with an interval of 15 days Fruit crops Aphids Other soft bodied insects Chrysoperla carnea or Mallada boninensis @ 10-20 larvae per infested tree depending on the pest population. Maintenance of history sheet: The follow ing information is furnished: 1. Date of egg collection. 2. Date of hatching. 3. Date of pupation. 4. Expected date of adult emergence. 5. Date of collection of adults. 6. Problems encountered with the culture during production. Biology of Host ( Corcyra cephalonica ): The eggs are oval and measure 0.5 x 0.3 mm. The white surface is sculptured and has a short nipple -like process at one end. The larvae are generally creamish   white except for the head capsule and the prothoracic tergite, w hich are brown. There are well -developed prolegs on abdominal segments 3 -6 and 10. A fully matured larva measures 15 mm. The last -instar larva spins a closely woven, very tough, double -layered cocoon in which it develops into a dark -brown pupa. The anterio r portion of the cocoon has a line of weakness through which the adult emerges. The adults are small. The hind -wings are pale -buff, and the fore -wings are mid -brown or greyish -brown with thin vague lines of darker brown colour along CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 129 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management the wing veins. The mal es are smaller than the females. Sexual activity usually begins shortly after adult emergence. There is a pre -oviposition period of about 2 days. Egg-laying mainly occurs during the night. The greatest numbers are laid on the second and third days after em ergence, although oviposition may continue throughout life. Eggs take about 2 -3 days to hatch. Optimum conditions for larval development of C. cephalonica are 30   32.50C and 70 per cent RH, at which, the period from egg hatch to adult emergence is only 26 -27 days. There is considerable variation in the number of larval instars; however, males generally have 7 and females have 8. The last -instar larvae pupate within the food. The adults emerge through the anterior end of the cocoon, where there is a line of weakness. The sex ratio is 1:1. The adult moth is nocturnal and is most active at nightfall. Host production: Material required: Absorbent cotton Storage racks Blotting paper Streptomycin sulphate Broken Pearl millet grain Rubber band Camel hair br ush Measuring cylinder Enamel Tray Oven Honey Home milling machine Markin cloth Sieves Mosquito net Formaldehyde 40% Moth aspirator (collector) Filter paper Oviposition drums Moth scale egg separator Plastic basin Face masks Shoe brush Storing drum s Soap Ground nut kernel Specimen tube Sulphur (WP) Yeast Coarse weighing balance Procedure: Preparation of rearing basins The basins (16  dia) used for Corcyra multiplication are thoroughly cleaned with 0.5% detergent wash and rinsing in tap water followed by wiping with dry, clean   used towel and shade drying. Whenever the trays are emptied after a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning steps a re repeated. Preparation of bajra medium for Corcyra a) The required quantities of bajra grains are coarsely milled and broken into 2 -3 pieces in a milling machine. The broken grains are heat sterilized at 1000C for 1 hour to eliminate the residual populatio n of stored product insects viz., Rhizopertha dominica , Sitotroga cerealella , Tribolium castaneum and fungal contaminants. Upon sterilization the grains are cooled under fan in a clean area. The grains are then transferred to plastic basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. b) Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken using a pounding machine or a mechanical blender (domestic mixer). Then 100 g of the broken kernel is transferred to each basin and the contents are hand mixed thoroughly. c) Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sul fur is added @ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% streptomycin sulfate and mixing of the contents follows this. This medium is used for rearing Corcyra larvae. d) The number of basins required for egg infestation i s calculated and the medium is prepared accordingly. Preparation of Corcyra eggs The primary source of Corcyra eggs is reputed laboratories, commercial producers for bulk preparation. If it is intended to begin the production with nucleus colony, the adul t moths can be collected from warehouses where the food materials are stored.   The eggs used for building up the colony of Corcyra have to be free from contaminants like the moth scales and broken limbs and not exposed to UV light.   The collections of overni ght laid eggs are measured volumetrically to ascertain the number of trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of eggs is known to contain approximately 16000   18000 eggs. Infestation of medium with eggs The overall production scheme involves initial infestation of the Pearl millet medium with Corcyra eggs in desired quantities. This is accomplished by sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc eggs of Corcyra is infested. The basins are then covered with clean markin cloth and held tightly with rubber fasteners. The basins are carefully transferred to the racks. Handling the trays during larval development CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 130 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin to feed the fortified Bajra medium. At this s tage, light webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae grow up they move down. During this period the larvae are allowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. Handling of adults The adults begin to emerge in 28 -30 days after infestation of the eggs. T he adults can be seen on the inner side of the markin cloth. They are either aspirated with mechanical moth collector or collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation is carried out in a tent of mosquito net. This prevents the large -scale escape of th e moths, which if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and spoil the grains stored by laying eggs. Workers involved in the collection of moths should wear face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of scales. The moths collected are transferred to the oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time. The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made of galvanized iron. The drums rest on tripod frames with legs of height 5cm. The bottoms of the drums are provided with wire meshes that enable collect ion of eggs. The walls of the drums have two vents (ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The vents are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of the drums have handles besides slots for introducing the moths and adult feed. The oviposition drums fille d in a day are maintained for four to seven successive days for egg collection after which are emptied and cleaned for next cycle of use. The adults are provided feed containing honey solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 ml honey with 50 ml w ater and 5 capsules of vitamin E (Evion). The feed is stored in refrigerator and used as and when required. Piece of cotton wool tied with a thread is soaked in the solution and inserted into the drum through the slot at the top. From a basin, moths can be collected upto 90 days after which the number of moths emerging dwindles down and keeping the basins is not economical for the producer. Handling of eggs The moths lay the eggs in large numbers loosely. The scales and broken limbs are also found in large r quantities along with the eggs. They cause potential hazard to the workers after years of working in Corcyra laboratory. To minimize the risk of scales freely floating in the air, the oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter paper in enamel trays which trap effectively the scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the workers comfort. Daily morning the oviposition drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are cleaned gently with a shoe brush so that the eggs and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the mesh are collected along with those on the filter paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling the eggs on filter paper to another container. Then they are passed to sieves in series and finally clean eggs are collected. The eggs are quantified in measuring cylinders and used for building up the stocks and natural enemy production. About 100 pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 4 days laying period inside the oviposition dr ums. From each basin an average of 2500 moths are collected. Hence from each basin 18.00   20.00 cc of eggs can be obtained in 90 days. Precaution: Bacterial diseasemay affect the Corcyra culture. To control this, Streptomycin sulphate is added to the cru shed graind at the rate of 0.2 gm/kg and mixed thoroughly. Occationally the mite Pyemotes ventricosus (Newport) may contaminate the culture and affect egg -laying and larval development. If mites are observed, thye racks, cages, boxes etc. should be disinfe cted with formalin and placed in the sun for six hours. Boxes containing developing larvae should be dusted with sulphur so that a thin layer of sulphur is present over the grains. If infestation is severe, it may be necessary to treat with the acaricide d icofol (Kelthane). For this, muslin sheets are dipped in a 0.05% solution of dicifol and air dried for a couple of hours. These sheets are spread over the grains in boxes. Mites coming in contact with the treated cloth are killed rapidly. Bracon hebetor Say must be kept away from infesting the culture of C. cephalonica. Maintenance of quality: Accurate information is needed on the history of individual basins. Maintenance of history sheet: The following information is furnished. 1. Date of egg infestation 2. Date of preparation of feed 3. Source of egg 4. Expected date of adult emergence 5. Daily collection of moths 6. Problems encountered with the basin during production Reference : Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. CBG -IPM: Laboratory Manual 131 Standard Operating Procedures for Integrat ed Pest Management Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control of Mass -Reared Arthropods.pp 171. National repository of natural enemies of crop pests and weeds. Final technical report (01 -04-1997 to 31-03-2000). Project Director ate of Biological Control (Indian Council of Agricultural Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 024. Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in biological control. Daya pullishing house. 1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi - 110035. Sattar , M and Abro , G. H. 2011 . Mass Rearing of Chrysoperla carnea (Stephens) (Neuroptera: Chrysopidae) Adults for Integrated Pest Management Programmes . Pakistan J. Zool., 43(3): 483 -487. Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of Natural Enemies. Project Direc torate of Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. Farm Post, Bangalore -560024 (India). http://www.nbaii.res.in http:// www. tnau.ac.in/