Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
80 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Paddy  
 
Crop -Paddy                                           Botanical name -Oryza sativa  (Family: Gramineae)  
Climate : Paddy is adopted under wide range of soils, better performance under heavy neutral 
soils (clay, clay loam and loamy) with good water holding capacity.  For better crop growth 
climatic condition requires with a wide range of temperature from  20 0C -35 0C. 
 
Fertilizer: Recomm ended dose of fertilizers @90:60:60 (upland), 100:60:60 (lowland &Hilly 
region), N:P:K, Kg./ha.  Hybrid Rice @ 120 -150 kg N+ 60 kg P 2O5 + 60 kg K 2O / ha + 25 kg 
ZnSO 4 / ha. 
 
Sowing: Optimum sowing time -last week of May to first week of June, subject to availability of 
moisture/rainfall.  Basmati sowing is fro m 20th June to 15th July.  
 
Sowing method:   Following two methods are commonly practiced:  
(a)   Direct seeding or Broadcasting method : In this method seed is directly sown in unpuddled 
and puddle field prepared for sowing at appropriate moisture level.  
 
(b) Transplanting method: In this method a nursery  is prepared for transplanting of rice as 
required for the methods of transplanting. For manual transplanting the nursery is prepared in 
1/20th of transplanting usually on raised beds. For mechanical transplanting the nursery is raised 
as mat or tray nursery.  The 25 days old seedlings ( 4 -5 leaf stage) uproot ed from the nursery –
bed are  transplanted 3 -4 cm deep following 20cm x 10cm spacing with 2 -3 seedlings/ hill in the 
line planting and 10cm x15 cm in random planting.    
 
Sowing Time:   The rice is grown almost in all crop seasons ie Kharif, Rabi and summar in the 
country. However, depending upon the prevailing  weather, it is sown in different perio ds in 
different regions.  
 
Seed Rate: Optimum seed rate of 50 kg/ha for upland,  25 kg/ha for lowland and hilly region.  
 
Water management : Uniform  leveling of field and proper drainage are most essential for an 
effective water management in irrigated field.  It is ideal to maintain 2 -5 cm water throughout the 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
81 
 growing season. Water should be drained out before top -dressing of fertilizer and let in 24  hours 
later.  
 
Resistant Varieties: For Stem Bore r: Ratna,Vikas,Saket -4,Green Leaf Hopper: ADT -38,IR -
50,IR -24, Gall Midge:  Gauri,Lalat,MDU -3, Blast: Rasi,Rasmi,KRH -2, Bacterial Leaf blight:  
Karjat -1,PR4 -41,PR -110,Sheath Blight:  ASD -18,ADT -39, Rice Tungro Vi rus: ASD -
15,Ratna,Saket -4,IR-34.  
 
Weed management:  The problem of weeds is less in puddled fields but it is high in unpuddled 
fields. Some herbicides such as Anilophos, Butachlor, Anilophos+Ethoxysulfuron, Pyrosolfuron -
ethyl, Almix + Butachlo r, Fentrazami de , Cinmethyline + 2,4D are used.  
 
Diseases and their control:  
Diseases  Control  
Khaira 5kg zinc with 2.5 kg lime(in 1000 liters of water ) / ha 10 days after 
transplanting  
Blast  Seed treatment with thiram @ 2.5g/kg of seed or tricyclazole 75 wp @ 
1.5 g/  kg of seed  
Brown spot  Carbendazim 50wp @ 2.0 g/kg seed or Mancozeb 75wp @ 2.5g/kg  
Bacterial Leaf 
Blight  (BLB)  Seed treatment with streptocycline (1g) + carbendazim 50 W.P. (20g) for 
8–10 kg of seed in 10 litres of water for 12 – 15 hours  
 
Insects and t heir control:  
Insect s Control  
Gundhi bug  Spray carbaryl 50 wp @1,500 g/ha during afternoon hours     
Stem Borer / Leaf 
Folder  Spray Cartap 50 wp @800 g/ha or chlorpyriphos 20 EC 2,000 ml/ha  
 Brown plant hopper  Spray Imidacloprid 200 Sl@125 ml/ha  or Thiomethoxa m  @ 50g/ha  
 
Harvesting and threshing :  The crop should be harvested when the grains turn yellow , moisture 
content is below 25 %.  
 
Yield: Average yield of rice varieties in case of upland rice is 2.0 -2.5 tonnes/ha, lowland rice 
4.5-5.0 tonnes/ha, hilly region 3.0 -3.5 tonnes/ha. With respect to rice hybrids in irrigated ecology 
is 5.5 -6.0 tonnes/ha.  
 
*******Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
82 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Whe at 
Crop: Wheat            Botanical name: Triticum aestivum  
 
Climate: Wheat requires well drained and clayey loam soil. However, good crop of wheat can 
be raised in sandy loam and black soil also.  In India wheat is a winter ( rabi) crop.  
 
Seed rate: For medium sized grain varieties Seed rate of 100 kg/ha, for bold seeded variety 125 
kg/ha and for late sown seed rate of 125 -150 kg/ha is recommended.  
 
Spacing: Spacing of 22.5 cm is considered optimum for irrigated timely sown wheat, for 
irrigated late sowin g spacing is reduced to 15 -18 cm.  
 
Land preparation and tillage technology : A brief description of which is given hereunder;  
 
Laser land levelling: This is a precursor resource conservation technology that is a must for the 
proper implementation of other R CT’s for greater productivity and profitability. This technology 
increases productivity , saves water and other inputs, e nhances factor productivity  and reduce  
costs of production . 
 
Surface seeding: This RCT is specifically suited to single crop diara  lands of Eastern parts of 
India (Eastern UP, Bihar, Assam and West Bengal) where soil remains wet after rice harvesting. 
The technology requires no tillage , broadcast dry or soake d seed under saturated condition, s cope 
in areas where soil remains wet afte r rice harvesting  and d oubles the cropping intensity  
 
Zero tillage: This is the most widely adopted RCT covering about 3 million hectares in rice -
wheat system of Indo -Gangetic plains and potential to extend to other areas. The main features of 
the technolo g y  a r e  direct drilling in untilled condition , advances sowing time , seeding at 
comparatively lower as well as higher moisture , saves more than 90 % fuel energy and time 
compared to practices followed during nineties  and s imilar or higher yield at lower cos t. 
 
FIRBS -Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed -planting System: This RCT is specifically  suited to 
areas of water scarcity. The water saved can help in bringing more area under irrigation resulting 
in boosting the production. This is mainly tested in the North West ern parts of India (Punjab, 
Haryana, Western UP) and has given similar yield in case of wheat but 10 to 30% higher yields 
in case of oilseeds and pulses.  This technology saves  seed and fertiliser nitrogen by about 25% , 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
83 
 lowers water requirement by about 30% , less weed population on bed tops , diversification of 
rice-wheat system  and l ess lodging.  
 
Rotary tillage: This technology also tested in the North -Western parts of India especially 
Haryana for growing wheat crop and has potential to be extended to other parts and other crops. 
The main  features of the technology are s ingle pass soil pulverisation and ferti -seed drilling , 
saves more than 80% fuel energy and time , produces more at lower cost , the modified machine 
called as Rotary Disc Drill can seed into loo se residues  and c omparatively costly farm 
equipment . 
 
Crop P rotection Packages  
1. For control of loose smut and flag smut , seed treatment with carboxin (75 WP) @ 2.5 
g/kg see d) or carbendazim (50 WP) @ 2.5 g/kg seed or tebuconazole (2DS) @ 1.25g/kg 
seed) or a  combination of a reduced dosage of carboxin (75 WP) @ 1.25g/kg seed  and a 
bioagent fungus, Trichoderma viride  @ 4 g/kg seed is recommended. Farmers should 
avoid using the seed from the infected fields.  
2. The yellow rust  may be controlled using recently re leased resistant wheat varieties . 
Susceptible wheat varieties may be sprayed with propiconazole or tebuconazole  
3. The powdery mildew , brown rust and spot blotch  may also be controlled with the foliar 
sprays of propiconazole @ 0.1%.  
4. The Karnal bunt  may be controlled in seed plots by spraying crop at boot leaf stage by 
propiconazole @ 0.1%.  
5. In the termite  prone areas, seed treatment with chlorpyriphos @ 0.9g a.i /kg seed, be 
taken up for their management. Seed treatment with thiamethoxam 70WS (Cruis er 70WS) 
@ 0.7 g a.i./kg seed .  
6. Crop planted under FIRBS is more prone to root aphid  and termite attack while zero 
tillage shows less termite damage.  Hence proper attention should be given in crop planted 
under FIRBS.  
7. Aphid control:   Imidacloprid 17.8 SL   @ 100ml/ha as foliar spray for the control of foliar 
aphids on need based conditions when the population reaches more than 10 aphids per 
tiller or  5 aphids per ear head . 
Irrigation:  Wheat  sown under irrigated conditions requires 4 to 6 irrigatio ns depending on the 
soil and weather conditions. If water is available for only 1 irrigation, it should be applied at 
crown root initiation stage (CRI). If water is available for 2 irrigations, it should be applied at 
CRI and boot leaf stage.  
 
Weed Control : For the control of broadleaved weeds 2,4 -D at 500 g/ha or metsulfuron at 4 g/ha 
or carfentrazone at 20 g/ha can be sprayed using about 300 litres of water/ha.  For the control of 
grasses isoproturon at 1000 g should be used.  For the control of complex wee d flora combination 
of isoproturon with 2,4 -D or metsulfuron, or   sulfosulfuron with metsulfuron can be applied at 
30-35 DAS at sufficient soil moisture.  
 
Yield:  Under irrigated conditions the yield may vary from 2.5 to 6.5 tonnes /ha depending upon 
pract ices followed.  
******Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
84 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Pigeonpea /Redgram /Arhar  
 
Crop -Pigeonpea                                                               Botanical name -Cajanus cajan  
 
 
 
Soil and climate:  Pigeonpea is cultivated in wide range of climatic conditions in tropical and 
subtropical areas with a temperature range of 20° -40°C. It is hardy to both low (5" 10°C) and 
high temperatures up to 40°C. The plant is sensitive to frost during all stages of i ts growth.  
 
Sowing Time:  It is sown in the first week of June in Punjab and Haryana and in the second 
fortnight of June in Uttar Pradesh and northern Rajasthan. Early planting ensures timely sowing 
of succeeding wheat crop. The medium and long duration pi geonpea is sown with the onset of 
monsoon, preferably by the first week of July.  
 
Sowing Method and Seed Rate:  Sowing pigeonpea on ridges is recommended as it facilitates 
proper drainage and ensure good plant stand. The seed rate for short duration pigeonpea is 15 -
18 kg/ha, whereas for long duration, it is 10 -12 kg/ha. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is 
beneficial.  
 
Fertilizer Application :  The recommended fertilizer dose is 15 -20 kg N, 40 -60 kg P 2 05, 20 kg 
K20 and 20 kg S/ ha. Use of PSB culture improves the available phosphorus status in the soil. In 
addition, application of 15 kg ZnSO4, 10 kg borax, 1 kg sodium molybdate, and 1 kg Fe/ha is 
also recommended for proper growth of plants and higher yield.  
 
Spacin g :  The row -to-row and plant -to-plant spacings for short duration pigeonpea and pre -
rabi crop are 50 cm x 15 cm and 30 cm x 10 cm, whereas for medium and long duration 
varieties, 60 cm x 20 cm and 75 cm x 25 cm respectively.  
 
Weed Control:  Hand weeding a t 30-45 days after sowing or pre -emergence application of 
Pendimethalin @ 1 -1.5 kg/ha provides effective control of weeds.  
 
Harvesting:  Short duration varieties are harvested in the middle or end of November, whereas 
medium and long duration varieties by January -March. When more than 80% pods are mature, 
the plants are cut close to the ground and bundled.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
85 
 Yield:  The average yield of sole short duration pigeonpea is 1,200 -1,500 kg/ha and that of long 
duration pigeonpea is 1,800 to 2,500 kg/ha.  
 
Integrate d pest management:  The major diseases of pigeonpea are wilt; sterility mosaic  and 
Phytophthora stem blight . Use of resistant varieties is the best option in disease -prone areas. 
The key insect -pests in short duration pigeonpea are pod borer  (Helicoverpa a rmigera ), 
spotted borer  (Maruca vitrata ) and leaf tier  (Eucosma critica ) whereas in medium and long 
duration pigeonpea, pod-fly (Melanagromyza obtusa ) and pod-borer (Helicoverpa ) are the 
major pests. The integrated pest -management strategy consists of cultural, mechanical, 
biological and chemical control measures.  
 
Varieties: The short duration  varieties, e.g. Pusa 992, UPAS 120, Manak, Paras, ICPL 151 and 
AL 201, are suitable for rotation with wheat. Wilt-resistant  varieties are: Asha (ICPL 87119), 
BDN  1, BDN 2, C 11, JA 4, TT 6, BSMR 853, JA 4, MA 3, MA 6, Narendra Arhar 1, M aruti 
(ICP 8863), BSMR 736 etc. S hort duration hybrid , GTH 1 has been released and notified for 
cultivation in Central India. This is the world's first CMS -based hybrid.  
 
 
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
86 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Blackgram  
 
Crop -Blackgram                                              Botanical name -Vigna mungo  
 
 
 
 
Climate:  During kharif, it is cultivated throughout the country. It is best suited to rice fallows 
during rabi in southern and south -eastern parts of India. Blackgram needs relatively heavier soils 
than greengram.  
 
Soil:  Well -drained, moisture retentive, deep loa m soils free from excessive soluble salts and 
sodicity are ideal. The crop, however, thrives well on marginal lands and protects eroded soils. It 
is grown as a rainfed crop in the warm plains as well as in the foot -hills and up to an altitude of 
2,000 m.  
 
Sowing time:  Optimum sowing time mid June subject to availability of moisture/rainfall.  
 
Seed Rate:  Seed rate is 15 -20 kg/ha for kharif and 25 -30 kg/ha for spring or rabi.  
 
Spacing:  Row -to-row distance is 30 -35 cm for kharif and 25 cm for rabi or spring.  
 
Harvesting and yield: The yield is around 10 -12 q/ha. Timely harvesting of the crop, when 80% 
of the pods is matures is recommended to avoid shattering.  
 
Integrated pest management : The major diseases are yellow mosaic in northern plains and 
powdery mildew in southern and south -eastern regions (in rabi). To control insect and pest, 
yellow mosaic virus, application of Phorate in soil before or at sowing @ 1 kg/ha is required.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
87 
 Varieti es: The powdery mildew -resistant variety LBG 17 is suitable for rabi in southern zone, 
and varieties. PDU 1 and Mash 414 are suitable for spring season. Use of resistant varieties like 
Yellow Mosaic Virus (YMV):Pant U -19,Pant U  -30 Sarala, Jawahar urd -2,Tej a (LBG -20), ADT -
4 Powdery Mildew (PM): TAU -2, IPU 02 -43, Stem fly:KBG -512,Cercospora leaf spot  (CLS): 
Jawa har urd -2, Jawahar urd - 3. 
 
******  
  Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
88 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Greengram  
 
Crop -Greengram                                                    Botanical name - Vigna radiata  
 
 
Climate:   Being a tropical crop it cannot tolerate low temperature. It thrives well at 25° -35°C. 
In northern plains, it can be grown in spring, summer and kharif whereas in southern parts it 
can be grown throughout the year as the variation in temperature is not muc h.  
 
Soils:  Greengram is cultivated on a wide variety of soils, ranging from sandy to heavy loam. 
Deep, well -drained loam soils of the alluvial tracts are, however, ideal. It is very sensitive to 
water logging.  
 
Sowing time:  The sowing time is the first f ortnight of March for the spring greengram, last 
week of March to first fortnight of April for the summer crop. In kharif, seed is sown with the 
onset of monsoon, preferably third week of June to mid -July. In rabi, seed can be sown from 
September to Decemb er or January, depending on the time of rice harvest and availability of 
irrigation.  
 
Seed Rate:  The seed rate is 25 -30 kg/ha for spring or summer and 15 -20 kg/ha for kharif and 
rabi. 
 
Fertilization:  Foliar spray of 2% urea at flowering enhances grain yi eld under rainfed 
conditions and also in rice fallows.  
 
Weed Control:  The control of weeds during 30 -40 days after sowing is very beneficial. The 
young crop is given one hand -weeding or hoeing. Use of weedicide Pendimethalin @ 1.0 -1.5 kg 
a.i./ha immediate ly after sowing is also useful.  
 
Harvesting:  The crop matures in 75 -85 days in kharif and 65 -70 days in spring season. It is 
harvested when more than 80% pods mature.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
89 
  
Yield:  The average yield varies from 6 to 8 q/ha. However, yields up to 10 -15 q/ha can be 
obtained with better management.  
 
Integrated pest management:  The major diseases of greengram yellow mosaic  virus 
(MYMV), Cercospora leaf spot , powdery mildew  and Macrophomina blight . Yellow mosaic 
is a major disease in northern and central parts, and powdery mildew in southern parts. The 
important insect -pests  are jassids, whitefly, stemfly, hairy caterpillar and thrips. The integrated 
pest management strategy con sists of cultural, mechanical, biological and chemical control 
measures.  
 
Varieties:  Use of yellow mosaic  virus  (YMV)  resistant varieties like: ML -131, Pant mung - 2, 
Pant mung -3, ML -267, AAU -34, LGG -450, Madhira -295, Lam -407, Gujarat mung -3, TMB -37, 
HUM -16, KM -2241, Powdery mildew  (PM): MH2 -15 (Sattya), CLS: COGG -912, Pant mung -
6, CLV: Pant mung -6.   
 
*******  
  Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
90 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Chikpea or Bengal  gram  
 
Crop - Chikpea or Bengal  gram                                    Botanical name -Cicer arietinum  
 
 
Climate:  It requires cool climate for its growth and development and high temperature for its 
maturity. However, severe cold and frost at the time of flowering causes flower drop. The 
optimum temperature for its growth ranges from 15° to 25°C.  
 
Soil:  Bengal gram is grown in well-drained , sandy -loam to deep loam soils of medium fertility. 
The alluvial soils of the Indo -Gangetic belt support a bumper crop of Bengal gram.  
 
Sowing Time:  In rainfed situation, second fortnight of October and in irrigated situation last 
week of October to second week of November are the proper sowing times. Recently, a few 
varieties have been developed that can be sown up to the second week of December.  
 
Fertilization: it does not require a large quantity of nitrogen; a small starter dose (15 -20 kg/ha) 
is required. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is beneficial. On soils with low to medium 
phosphorus status, crop responds to phosphatic fertilizer up to 60 kg P20, /ha. Phosphate -
solubilizing bacteria (PSB) have been found effective .  
 
On soils in exchangeable potash and sul phur, application of 30 -40 kg K 20 and 20 kg S/ ha 
is necessary to obtain good yields. In addition, application of 15 kg ZnSO4/ha, 10 k g borax/ha, 1 
kg sodium molybdate, and 1 kg Fe/ha is also recommended for soils deficient in these nutrients. 
Foliar application of 2% urea or DAP at flowering and early podding improves yield rainfed and 
late sown crop.  
 
Spacing: The crop is sown in rows , 30-45 cm apart. Seeds are placed 7 -10 cm deep in soil; the 
rate depends on seed size from 60 to 100 kg/ha. Planting on raised beds (67.5 cm width) 
accommodating 2 rows is beneficial especially  on heavy -textured soils.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
91 
 Weed Control: One hand -weeding 30 -40 days after sowing or pre -emergence application of 
weedicide Pendimethalin @ 1 kg a.i./ha is recommended for effective control of the weeds.  
 
Irrigation:  The crop responds to irrigation 45 days after sowing and at the early podding stage. 
In the absence  of winter rains, irrigation is beneficial.  
 
Yield: In northern plains, the crop matures in 150 -160 days, whereas in Central and South 
Zones, it matures in 120 -125 days. Under irrigated conditions, it yields 1,500 to 2,000 kg of 
grains/ha but up to 3,000 kg/ha may be obtained under favorable conditions.  
 
Integrated pest management : Pod-borer  is the major pest. It requires regular monitoring from 
flowering onward for eggs and larvae. Sex -pheromone traps (5 traps/ha) should be installed at 
flower bud initia tion stage. Economic threshold limit may be 1 -2 larvae/5 to 10 plants.  
 
Disease management : The major diseases are Ascochyta blight in North -west plains zone and 
wilt in Central zone.  Seed should be treated with fungicides viz. Carbendazim+Thiram (1 g+2 
g/kg) at sowing. Seed -dressing with bioagent Trichoderma vixens  @ 0.5 g/kg or T. harzianium  
or T viride  @ 4 g/kg seed +fungicide Carboxin (Vitavex) @ 1 g/kg seed should be followed.  
 
********  
  Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
92 
 Package of practices (PoP) of Lentil  
 
Crop -Lentil                                                 Botanical name -Lens culinaris  
 
 
 
Climate: Its range of cultivation extends to an altitude of 3,500 m in north -west hills. The 
optimum temperature for its growth and development ranges from 15 to 25 C.  
 
Soil:  Lentil is grown on a wide range of soils ranging from light loamy sand to heavy clay soil  in 
northern parts, and in moderately deep, light black soil in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.  
 
Fertilization: The recommended dose of fertilizers is 20 kg N, 40 Kg P 2 O5 20 kg K 2 O and 20 
kg S/ha. In soils, low in Zn, soil application of 20 kg ZnSo4 is r ecommended under rainfed and 
late sown condition; foliar spray of 2% urea improves yield.  
 
Sowing Time:  The seed is sown in  the second fortnight of October under rainfed condition. 
However, it can be sown in the first week of November in irrigated areas. Under late -sown 
condition, the seed can be sown up to 15 December.  
 
Seed Rate: The seed rate is 30 -40 kg/ha for small –seeded varieties  and 50 -60 kg/ha for bold 
seeded varieties, and row to -row spacing is 25 cm.  
 
Weed Control: One weeding 30 -40 days afte r sowing or use of weedicide ( Pendimethalin @ 1.0 
1.25 kg/ha) immediately after sowing helps in controlling weeds.  
 
Irrigation:  In the absence of winter rains, Light irrigation 40 -50 days after sowing and at pod -
formation stage is beneficial.  
 
Harvesting : When more than 80% pods matures;  it is cut with a sickle, dried on the threshing 
floor and threshed by beating with sticks of trampling with bullocks.  
 
Yield:   The average yield is 8 to 10 q/ha under rainfed and 12 -15 q/ha under irrigated condition. 
Under good management, it may yield up to 20 q/ha.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
93 
  
Disease and pest management : The major diseases of lentil are rust in northern plain and wilt 
in Central zone. Use of resistant varieties is helpful in controlling the disease. Pest is not a major 
problem in lentil. In some years aphid  population rises due to rise in temperature during January 
of February, and causes heavy damage. Spray of Monocrot ophos (0.04%) is effective for aphid 
control.  
 
Varieties : Use of resistant varieties like small seeded Rust resistant : PL-406, PL -639, PL - 4, 
and L -4147 bold seeded Rust resistant : L-4076, DPL -15, IPL -406, DPL -62 etc.   
 
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
94 
  
Package of practices (PoP) of Pea/Field Pea/ Graden Pea  
 
Crop -Pea                                                                   Botanical name -Pisum sativum  
 
 
Soil and climate : This crop grows best in areas having 15° -25°C for 4 -5 months. It can be 
grown on a variety of soils; however, deep loamy soils of Indo -Gangetic plains are the best. The 
crop can withstand mild alkaline conditions but does not thrive well on acidic soils.  
 
Seed Rate and Sowing:  The seed rate is 70 -80 kg/ha. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is 
beneficial. The seed is sown in lines at 30 cm row -to-row distance. Planting on raised beds (67.5 
cm wide with 2 rows of pea) improves yield and economizes irrig ation water.  
 
Irrigation: In the absence of winter rains, irrigations 40 -45 days after sowing and at pod -
formation stage are required. The crop receiving irrigation remains protected against frost to a 
greater extent.  
 
Fertilization : The recommended dose of fer tilizers is 20 -40 kg N, 60 kg P 205, 20 kg K 2O and 20 
kg S/ha. Use of PSB culture improves the status of available phosphorus in the soil. In addition, 
application of 15 kg zinc sulphate, 10 kg borax, 1 kg sodium molybdate is beneficial wherever 
soil is deficient in these micronutrients. Foliar spray o f 2% urea at flowering/pod initiation 
improves yield particularly under late sown conditions.  
 
Weed Control:  One hand -weeding 30 -45 days after sowing or application of Pendimethalin @ 
1.0-1.5 kg a.i./ha soon after sowing helps in controlling the weeds. Th e crop matures in 130 -140 
days. In dwarf varieties, inter culture operations are convenient.  
 
Yield:  The average yield under irrigation is 15 -20 q/ha. Timely harvesting of the crop, after 130 -
140 days of sowing is recommended to avoid shattering.  
 
Disease  and pest management : The major disease of field pea is powdery mildew , which 
causes heavy losses in yield. The varieties resistant to powdery mildew should he used to control 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
95 
 the disease. In some parts of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, crop is affected by rust disease , in those 
areas rust -tolerant varieties  like HUDP 15, IPF 99 -25, IPFD 1 -10 and IPF 99 -13 should be 
grown. There is no major pest damage in field pea. Howev er, sometimes, crop is affected  by 
stem -fly. Seed treatment with Phorate 2% is beneficial.  
 
Varieties:  Use of resistant varieties like Powdery Mildew  (PM): Rachna,  Pant Pea -5, Aparna 
(HFP -4), Maliviya Matar -2 (HUP -2), JP -885, Shikha  (KFP -103), Sapana (KPMR 144 -1), 
KPMR400 (Indra),  Pant Pea -13, Rust tolerant : Malviya Matar -15(HUDP - 15), IPFD 1 -10 
(Prakash), Pant P ea - 25 etc..   
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
96 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Maize  
 
Crop - Maize                                                                            Botanical name - Zea m ays L.  
 
 
 
 
Climate: Maize is warm weather  crop. Kharif season is the main growing season in northern 
India.  In the south, however, maize may be sown any time from April to October, as the climate 
is warm even in the winter.  
 
Soil:  Maize can be grown successfully in wide range of soils ra nging from loamy sand to clay 
loam.  
 
Variety: It is always better to select a "Single Cross Hybrid" developed and released for a set of 
climatic condition. However in area s where, hybrid seed availability cannot be ensured like high 
altitude and tribal re gions, high yield potential composite varieties can be grown. Hybrids of 
different maturity groups for Kharif season, hybrids of late maturity for Rabi  season and hybrids 
of early maturity for spring season should be pr eferred for maize cultivation.  
 
Time of sowing: The maize can be grown round the year in all seasons, viz. Kharif  (monsoon), 
post-monsoon, Rabi  (winter) and spring. It is desirable to complete the sowing 12 -15 days prior 
to onset of monsoon.  
 
Seed rate and plant geometry:  The seed rate depen ds on purpose, seed size, plant type, season, 
sowing methods, planter etc. For different purposes of maize cultivation, the following crop 
geometry and seed rate  should be adopted .  
 
Seed rate and plant geometry of maize for different purposes  
Purpose  Seed rate (Kg/ha)  Plant geometry  
(row x plant, cm)  Plant Population  
Grain (normal, QPM)  20 60 x 20  
75x 20  83,333  
66,666  
Fodder  50 30x10  333,333  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
97 
  
Seed treatment: To protect the crop from seed and major soil -borne diseases and insect -pests, it 
is always advisable to treat the seed with fungicides and insecticides before sowing as per the 
details given as under.  
Fungicide/pesticide  Rate of application (g/kg seed)  
Bavistinn + Captain in 1:1 ratio  2.0 
Apron 35 SD  4.0 
Captan  2.5 
Imidaclorpid  4.0 
 
Manuring and fertilization : For higher economic yield of maize, application of 10 tonnes 
FYM/ha, 10 -15 days prior to sowing supplemented with 150 -180 Kg N, 70 -80 Kg P 2O5, 70-80 
Kg K 2O and 25 Kg ZnSO 4/ha is recommended. Full doses of P, K and Zn should be applied 
basal preferably drilling of fertilizers in bands along the seed using seed -cum-fertlizer drills. 
Nitrogen (N) should be applied in five splits for higher producti vity and use efficiency . 
 
Diseases management  : In India, the major diseases cause an average yield loss of 13.2% of 
which foliar diseases (5 %), stalk rots, root rots, ear rots (5 %) cause major yield losses. For 
reduction of incidence of diseases, resist ant varieties/hybrids should be grown.  
 
Harvesting:  Male parent should be harvested first than the female and should be kept separately. 
Optimum moisture content in grain at harvesting should be around 20%. The harvested cobs 
should spread evenly instead o f making heap.  
 
Yield : By adopting package of practices as indicated above; it is possible to obtain 50 -60 qtl/ha 
grain in case of hybrid and 40 -50 qtl/ha of grain in case of composites.  
 
 
*****  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
98 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Sorghum  
 
 
Crop - Sorghum                                                               Botanical name - Sorghum bicolor (L.)  
 
 
 
Soil: Sorghum is grown in a variety of soils in India. Soils with clay loam or loam texture, 
having good water retention capacity are best suited for sorghum cultivation. It does well in PH 
range 6.0 to 8.5 as it tolerates consid erable salinity and alkalinity.  
 
Season:  Being a rain -dependent Kharif  crop, sowing is best done with the onset of monsoon. In 
normal season, sowing is comple ted in J uly in most of the area. The Rabi  planting around middle 
of September is ideal but can be extended up to last week of October . 
 
Seed rate and spacing: The plant population of 0.18 to 0.2 million plants/ha is optimum. The 
recommended spacing to achieve this  plant population is 45 cm between rows and 10 -12 cm 
between plants within rows.  A seed rate of 8 -10 kg/ha is recommended to obtain required plant 
population.  
 
Manuring and fertilization: For sustaining productivity on long -term basis application of farm  
yard manure @ 10 tonnes/ha, 15 days before  to sowing is important. In addition to farm yard 
manure, application of 60 kg N and 40 kg P 2O5/ha is recommended. To enhance the utilization of 
applied nitrogen, split application (50% as basal dose and 50% as top-dress) is suggested. 
However, the P 2O5 is to be given as basal dose only.  
 
Irrigation:  July sown rainy season crop may also need l -2 irrigations depending upon 
distribution of rains. For summer sown crop 5 -6 irrigations are required due to high evapora tive 
demand of atmosphere. In Southern region  Rabi  season crops needs about 4 irrigations.  
 
Pest management : The major pests are shootfly , stem -borer, midge and earhead bug . Shootfly 
can be avoided by suitable adjustment of planting time so that the vulner able stage of crop 
escapes from shootfly damage. Stem -borer damage which is not serious in most situations can be 
checked by the application of insecticides, viz. Carbaryl 3 G, Malathion 10 D or Furadan 3 G @ 
10-12 kg/ha in the whorl at 30 -35 days after ge rmination.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
99 
 Disease management:  The disease management involves combination of cultural  and chemical 
control measures, using Aureofungin (200 ppm) and 0.2% Captan during flowering.  Spraying 
Dithane M -45 (2%) 2 -3 times during early growth of plants gives good control.  Sorghum downy 
mildew  is commonly prevalent in the transitional belt of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Growing of 
resistant cultivars and clean cultivation can effectively control the disease. Seed dressing with 
Metalaxyl compounds, viz. Ridomil 25  or Apron 35 sD @ 1 g a.i./kg seed, gives satisfactory 
control.  
 
Harvesting  and Yield : Harvesting at physiological maturity is very important to avoid grain 
mould damage.  Average yield is 8 -14 qtl/ha.  
 
 
*****  
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
100 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Pearl Millet  
 
Crop - Pearl Millet                                      Botanical name - Pennisetum glaucum  
  
          
 
Soil and climate : The crop is grown mostly during Kharif  from June to October. However, in 
Tamil Nadu and Gujarat it is also grown in summer season under irrigation.  Crop is grown on a 
wider range of soils from very light soils on sand dunes in Rajasthan to red loam  in Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu and parts of Maharas htra and on black soils in Andhra Pradesh, parts of Karnataka 
and Maharashtra.  
 
Varieties : At present, hybrids are grown widely across the states. Some of them are Pusa 23, 
HHB 67 and ICMH 356. In addition, there are also regionally important hybrids, viz . GHB 558 
and GHB 577 in Gujarat; Shraddha and Saburi in Maharashtra; HHB 50, HHB 60, HHB 68 and 
HHB 94 in Haryana; COH 8 in Tamil Nadu; and RHB 58, RHB 121 and RHB 90 in Rajasthan. 
The early -maturing hybrids HHB 67, ICMH 356, RHB 121 and GHB 538 have show ed promise 
in many state s. Among the varieties, Raj 171, ICMV 221, Pusa Composite 334, Pusa 383 and 
Samrudhi are popular.  
 
Sowing time:  Sowing is done normally in June -July with the onset of monsoon in Kharif. The 
Rabi crop is planted in October while summer crop is planted in the January -February.  
 
Seed rate and sowing:  Plant population 0.175 to 0.2 million/ha is optimum for obtaining higher 
yields. The recommended spacing is 45 cm between rows and 10 -12 cm between plants within 
the row. The seed rate of 5 kg/ha is required to obtain the required crop stand and the seeds are to 
be drilled at 2 cm depth.  
 
Manures and fertilizers:  It is important to apply 8 -10 tonnes of FYM, as it helps in moisture 
conservation. As the crop is grown under diverse conditi ons, from low to high level of 
management in different states, the manurial requirement also varies accordingly. For example in 
Rajasthan, where crop is grown under severe drought conditions, application of 20 -40 kg N/ha in 
2 splits would be sufficient. On  the other hand in Gujarat and Haryana and also in Maharashtra, 
60-80 kg N/ha would be optimum. In addition, phosphorus and potassium also need to be 
provided to realize optimum yields.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
101 
 Disease and pest management:  Seed treatment with Apron 35 so @ 2 g a. i./kg seeds followed 
by Metalaxyl spray @  125 mg a.i./litre of water 20-25 days later will effectively check the 
disease. Rotation of different hybrids/improved varieties of pearl millet in alternate years is also 
effective in arresting spread of downy mil dew. Ergot is another important disease affecting pearl 
millet. The primary inoculum of the disease is in soil . White grub  infestation can be managed by 
mixing of Phorate 10 G or Quinalphos 5 G @ 12 kg/ha with seed and applying in furrows at 
sowing.  
 
Harve st and storage:  Pearl millet is harvested when grain moisture is around 20%. Pearl millet 
grains are prone to spoilage during storage. Hence, it is important to brin g down moisture to 12% 
or less f or safe storage. Improved storage structure, viz. metal bin s made out of GI sheets, are 
suitable for safe storage of grains. The pearl millet stover is a valuable feed for cattle.  
 
Yield :  Under Irrigated condition, Grain -23-35 qtl/ha and Fodder -100-120 qtl/ha. Under Rainfed 
condition, Grain -12-15 qtl/ha and  Fodde r-70-75 qtl/ha.  
 
******  Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
102 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Barely  
 
Crop - Barley                                                             Botanical name - Hordeum vulgare L.  
 
 
 
Climate : The crop can withstand cool humid and warm dry climates . Barley matures 2 -3 weeks 
earlier than that of wheat and other Rabi  cereals .  
 
Soil: Barley is more tolerant to a saline -alkaline soils and less to acidic soils when compared 
with other cereals. It is more favored under these conditions in Rajasthan, Haryana , Punjab, 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. It was found to be a successful crop on coastal saline 
soils of Sunderbans in the West Bengal.  
 
Varieties : It is interesting to note that the 2 -row malting barley, namely, DWR 28 has been 
reported to be giving comparable yields with those of the good malting 6 -row varieties such as K 
551 and RD 2503 . Barley gives  5-6 tonnes grain/ha with moderate levels of fertility and 
irrigation.  
 
Sowing time: The normal sowing time extends from middle of October to end  of November, 
depending upon the elevation, temperature, soil type  and moisture status. Under rainfed 
conditions, sowing should be completed by the last week of October, when the mean temperature 
falls to 23° to 25°C.  
 
Seed rate:  Seed rate of 75 -80 kg/ha m ay be used for irrigated timely sown, whereas a seed rate 
of 100 kg/ha is suitable for irrigated late -sown and saline -alkaline soils. For rainfed areas, a seed 
rate of 80 -100 kg/ha should be used depending on soil -moisture status at the sowing. In the cool  
arid region of Ladakh a higher seed rate of 250 -300 kg/ha may be used.  
 
Seed treatment: Covered smut  and loose smut  can be controlled by seed treatment with either 
of Vitavax, Benlate and Bavistin @ 2 g/kg seed before planting. Dry seed treatment with 0.2 5% 
Carboxin would control loose smut. Seed treatment with Vitavax and Thiram in 1:1 ratio or 
Raxil @ 1.5 g/kg seed, should be used to control the covered smut and leaf stripe . Seed 
treatment with Oxycarboxin 0.25% is recommended for the control of yellow r ust.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
103 
  
Manuring and fertilization:  Use, 10 -12 cart -loads of decomposed farmyard manure o r compost 
per hectare in poor lands . Agronomic experiments indicate that barley responds well to an 
application of 40 -60 Kg N/ha under rainfed condition and 60 -80 Kg N/ ha under irrigated 
condition, depending upon the soil, and variety.  
 
Diseases and i nsect -pests management : Powdery mildew  caused by Erysiphe graminis can be 
controlled by dusting fine sulphur (200 mesh) @ 15 -20 kg/ha or 1% Karathane . 
Helminthosporium leaf spot diseases can be effectively controlled by spraying with copper 
fungicides or Dithane Z -78. Among the insect -pests, aphid  (Rhopalosiphum maidis)  can be 
controlled by  spraying of Methyl demeton 25 EC or Dimethoate 30 EC at 1,000 ml/ha or 
Imidacloprid 2 00 SL, at 100 ml/ha in 200 -250 litres of water per ha. Systemic granular 
insecticides, viz. Phorate 10% or Disulfoton 5% should be used in seed furrows @ 0.5 to 1 kg 
a.i./ha to control the pest.  
 
Yield: The average yield of rain fed crop ranges between 2,00 0 and 2,500 kg/ha, whereas that of 
irrigated crop is twice as much. Under favorable conditions of manuring and management 
practices, improved varieties are capable of giving grain yield of 5 -6 tonnes/ha under irrigated 
timely sown conditions, from 3 to 3.5  tonnes/ha under late -sown conditions and from 2.5 to 3 
tonnes/ha under rainfed conditions.  
 
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
104 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Finger Millet    
Crop - Finger Millet                                             Botanical name - Eleusine coracana . 
 
 
 
 
Climate  & Soil : It is heat loving plant and for its germination, the minimum temperature 
required is 8 -10 oC. A m ean temperature range of 26 -29 oC during the growth is the best for 
proper development and good crop yield.  Finger millet can be grown on a w ide adoptability to 
different soil from very poor to very fertile and can tolerate a certain degree of alkalinity.  
 
Varieties: A number of high yielding varieties have been evolved and released for cultivation in 
different states.  
 
Season: Finger millet is  grown in all the cropping seasons in different parts of the country. More 
than 90 per cent of the area is under rainfed conditions, grown during Kharif  season.  
Seed rate and spacing:  Line sowing is ideal and seed drills giving a spacing of 22.5 -30 cm 
between rows should be used. Finger millet seeds are very small (400 seeds/g) and the 
recommended seed rate of 10 kg/ha will contain about 4 million seeds.  
 
Manuring and fertilization:  Farmyard manure or compost @ 5 tonnes per ha should be applied 
2-3 week s prior to sowing. Entire P 2O5 and K 2O are to be applied at sowing, whereas nitrogen is 
to be applied in 2 or 3 split doses depending upon moisture availability.  
 
Diseases management: The integrated disease management practices include  growing resistant 
varieties, viz. VL 149, GPU 26, GPU 28, GPU 45 and GPU 48.  Treating seeds with Thiram or 
Mancozeb or Carbendazim @ 2 g/kg seed 24 hr before sowing.  Sowing early in the season, 
replacing 25% N with either farmyard manure, compost and biofertilizers reduces t he blast 
severity.  
 
Harvesting : The crop matures in about 120 -135 days depending on the tract and the variety. The 
ear heads are harvested with ordinary sickles and straw is cut close to ground.  
Yield :  It is possible to harvest 20 -25 qtl/ha of grain and 60-80 qtl/ha of fodder. The Straw of 
finger millet makes nutritious fodder.  
*****  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
105 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Kodo Millet    
Crop - Kodo Millet                                              Botanical name - Paspalum scrobiculatum  
 
 
 
Climate: Kodo is grown  mostly in warm and dry climate. It is highly drought tolerant and, 
therefore, can be grown in areas where rainfall is scanty and erratic.  
 
Soil: Kodo is grown from gravelly and stony upland poor soils to loam soils. Deep, loamy, fertile 
soils, rich in org anic matter, are preferred for satisfactory growth. Well -drained soils with 
adequate moisture supply are required for uninterrupted growth of this crop.  
 
Season:  Sowing with the onset of monsoon is beneficial . Sowing time extends from middle of 
June to end  of July in different states. The optimum sowing time in Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh which accounts for nearly 80% area under crop in the country is from last week of 
June to first week of July.  
 
Varieties: A number of varieties with high yield potenti al have been released for different states.  
 
Spacing and seed rate:  Spacing of 22.5 cm between rows and 10 cm between plants within row 
is optimum. The seed rate is 10 kg/ha for line sowing and 15 kg/ha for broadcasting.  
 
Manuring and fertilization:  Besid es farmyard manure application, fertilizers @ 40 kg N and 20 
kg P 2O5/ha for Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and @ 20 kg each of NPK/ha for 
other states are recommended. Treating seeds with Agrobacterium radiobacter and Aspergillus 
awamori @ 25 g/kg seed is beneficial.  
 
Irrigation management : During dry periods, irrigations are required every 4 -7 days depending 
on the severity of the drought and type of soil. First irrigation at 25 -30 DAS and second 
irrigation at 40 -45 DAS. Drainout the excessive  rain water from the field during heavy and 
continuous rains.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
106 
 Weed Control : It is essential to control weeds in the initial stages of plant growth. Generally 
two weeding at an interval of 15 days are sufficient. Weeding may be done with hand hoe or 
wheel hoe in line sown crop.  
 
Diseases management : Rust  disease hinders photosyn thesis and cause considerable loss in 
yield.  This can be c ontrolled to some extent by  spraying of 0.2% solution of Mancozeb 75 WP . 
Similarly Head smut  disease can be controlled by s eed treated with thiram or ceresan @ 2.5 
g/kg of seed and soaking seeds in hot water at 55 oC for 7 -12 minutes.  
 
Harvesting Time : In Kharif season, the crop becomes ready for harvest in the month of 
September or October in northern India and in Rabi season, it is harvested from January to 
February.      
 
Yield :  With improve pack age and practices, one can obtain 15 -18 quintal grain and 30 -40 
quintal straw per hectare.  
 
*******  
 
 
 
 
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
107 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Foxtail Millet    
 
Crop - Foxtail Millet                                                       Botanical name - Setaria italica  
 
 
 
Climate and soil: Foxtail known for its drought tolerance, it was once an indispensable crop of 
vast rainfed areas in semi -arid regions in India. At present, foxtail millet is cultivated on a 
limited area in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharasht ra, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and north eastern states . Foxtail grows well on well -drained loamy soils.  
 
Season:  Optimum time of sowing for rainfed crop is August -September in Tamil Nadu, July -
August in Karnataka, first fortnight of July in Andhra Pradesh and second and third week of July 
in Maharashtra. In Tamil Nadu, Kharif irrigated crop is planted from the beginn ing of June to 
end of July and summer irrigated crop in January. For plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, middle 
of June is the optimum sowing time.  
 
Varieties: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states.  
 
Spacing and seed rate:  Optimum spacing is 25 -30 cm between rows and 8 -10 cm between 
plants within a row. The seed rate is 8 -10 kg/ha for line sowing and 15 kg/ha for broadcasting.  
 
Manuring and fertilization: Apply 5 tonnes of farm yard manure per hectare at 2-3 weeks prior 
to sowing. Fertilizer required 40: 30:0 kg NPK / ha for Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand and Tamil 
Nadu, 30:20:0 kg NPK / ha for other states .  
 
Inter cropping: Andhra Pradesh:  Foxtail millet+ ground nut (2:1 ratio) , Foxtail millet + cotton 
(5:1 ratio) - Royal seema regions.  Finger millet + pigeon pea in 5:1 row ratio.  
 
Irrigation management : Kakun sown during Kharif season does not require any irrigation. 
However, if dry spell prevails for longer period, then first irrigation at 25 -30 DAS and second 
irrigation at 40 -45 DAS must be given to boost the yields.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
108 
 Weed Control : Two to three weedings with hand hoe are sufficient to keep the weeds in 
control.Post -emergence application of 2, 4 -D sodium salt (80%) @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha at 20 -25 DAS. 
Isoproturo n @ 1.0 kg a.i. /ha as pre -emergence spray is also effective in weeds control.  
 
Diseases and Insect -pest management : For Downy mildew  disease s pray of 0.2% solution of 
Mancozeb 75 WP may help to control the disease and seed treatment is also helps in contr olling 
the disease.  To control Shoot fly , apply Phorate @15 kg/ha (10% granules) in the soil at the time 
of field preparation or Carbofuran (Furadan) 3% granules @ 30 kg/ha in furrows or as broadcast 
before sowing.  
 
Harvesting : The crop matures in 80 -100 d ays. The crop is harvested when the ear heads are dry, 
either by cutting the whole plant by sickle or the ears separately. The crop is usually harvested 
during Kharif season from September to October and Rabi season from January to February.  
Yield :  Grain yield of foxtail millets is 15 -18 qtl/ha and Straw yield is 20 -40 qtl/ha.  
 
*******  
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
109 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Proso Millet  
     
Crop - Proso Millet                                                 Botanical name - Panicum miliaceum  
 
 
 
Climate:  Proso millet is a crop of warm climate. It is highly drought resistant and can be grown 
in areas where there is scanty rainfall. It can withstand water stagnation also to some extent.  
 
Soil: Proso millet can be grown both in rich and poor soils, having variable texture, ranging 
between sandy loam to clays of black cotton soils, Well drained loam or sandy loam soils free 
from  Kankar  and rise in organic matter are ideal for proso millet cultivation.  
 
Varieties: A number of varieties with high yield potential have b een released for different states.  
 
Season:  The rainy season crop is sown with the onset of monsoon, preferably in July. As late 
Kharif or Rabi crop, it is sown in September -October in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. In 
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh as irrigated  catch crop, it is sown from mid -March to mid -M a y .  
 
Seed rate and spacing : Proso millet can be sown by broadcasting or drilling seeds in furrows 3 -
4 centimetre deep. Row to row distance should be kept 25 cm and plant to plant 10 cm. 
Depending  upon the meth od of sowing, 8 -12 kg /ha seed is required. It is desirable that the seed 
be treated with organo -mercurial compounds like Agrosan G.N. or Ceresan at the rate of 2.5g per 
Kg of seed before sowing.  
 
Manuring and fertilization : To get a good crop, general fert ilizer recommendations under 
irrigated condition are 40 -60 kg nitrogen, 30 kg P 2O5 and 20 kg K 2O per hectare. Under rainfed 
condition, fertilizer dose is reduced to half of the irrigated crop.  
 
Irrigation management:  Proso millet sown during Kharif season , generally does not require 
any irrigation. Summer crop, however, would require two to four irrigations depending upon soil 
type and climatic conditions.  
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
110 
 Weed Control : For getting high yield and minimising loss of soil moisture and nutrients, the 
field sh ould be kept weed -free up to 35 days stage. Post -emergence application of 2,4 -D sodium 
salt (80%) @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha at 20 -25 DAS. Isoproturon @ 1.0 kg a.i. /ha as pre -emergence spray 
is also effective in weeds control.  
 
Diseases and Insect -pest management : Head smut  disease can be controlled by t reating seeds 
with organo -mercurial compounds like Ceresan at the rate of 3g per kg of seed or hot water 
treatment (soaking seeds in hot water at 550C for 7 -12 minutes). For control of Shoot fly , apply 
Phorate @15 kg/ha (10% granules) in the soil at the time of field preparation or Carbofuran 
(Furadan) 3% granules @ 30 kg/ha in furrows or as broadcast before sowing.  
 
Harvesting : Proso millet is ready for harvest after 65 -75 days of sowing in most of the varieties. 
Therefore, the crop should be harvested when about two thirds of seeds are ripe.  
 
Yield : With improved package of practices it is possible to harvest 20 -23 quintals of grain and 
50-60 quintals of straw per hectare.  
*******  Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
111 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Ba rnyard Millet  
     
Crop - Barnyard Millet                         Botanical name - E c h i n o c h l o a  f r u m e n t a c e a  
. 
 
 
C l i m a t e : Warm and moderately humid climate is good for rising Barnyard millet crop. It is a hardy 
crop and is able to withstand adverse conditions  of weather better than cereals.  
 
Soil: It thrives best on the sandy loam soil having sufficient amount of organic matter. Gravely and 
stony soil soils with poor fertility are not suitable for raising Barnyard millet.  
 
Sowing time : In Tamil Nadu, rainfed crop is sown in September -October and irrigated crop in 
February -March. In Uttarakhand and north -eastern states, sowing in April -May is ideal.  
 
Varieties: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states.  
 
Seed rate and spacing:  Optimum spacing of 25 cm between rows and 10 cm between plants 
within row and seed rate of 8 -10 kg/ha for line sowing and 12 -15 kg/ha for broadcasting are 
optimum.  
 
Manuring and fertilization: Apply 5 tonnes of farm yard manure per hectare 2 -3 weeks before 
sowing and fertilize r required for different states is different. For Andhra Pardesh, NPK ratio is 
20:20:0; for Bihar, Tamilnadu and UP, NPK ratio is 40:20:0 . 
 
Irrigation management : Generally barnyard millet does not require any irrigation. However, if 
dry spell prevails for a longer period, then one irrigation at 25 -30 DAS (Day after sowing) and 
second irrigation at panicle initiation stage 45 -50 DAS.  
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
112 
 Weed Control : Post -emergence application of 2, 4 -D sodium salt (80%) @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha at 2 0-25 
DAS. Isoproturon @ 1.0 kg a.i. /ha as pre -emergence spray is also effective in weeds control.  
 
Diseases  and insect -pest management : Downy mildew  disease can be controlled by s praying of 
0.2% solution of Mancozeb 75 WP in standing.  Rust is controlled by spraying of Mancozeb 75 WP 
at the rate of 2 kg in 1000 litres of water per hectare may check the spread of this disease.  For 
control of Stem borer , apply Phorate @15 kg/ha (10% granules) in the soil at the time of field 
preparation.  
 
Harvesting : The crop should be harvested when it is ripe. It is cut from the ground level with the 
help of sickles and stacked in the field for about a week before threshing is done by trampling 
under the feet of bullocks.  
 
Yield :  Grain -12-15 qtl/ha and Straw -20-25 qtl/h a. 
 
*******  
 
 Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
113 
 Package of Practices (PoP) of Little Millet  
     
Crop - Little Millet                           Botanical name - Panicum sumatrense  
 
 
 
C l i m a t e : Little millet originated in south -east Asia and is now a days it is grown throughout India, 
particularly in Madhya Pradesh Orissa Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh.  It can withstand both drought 
and water logging.  
 
Soil: Little millet can be grown on a wide adoptability to different soil from very poor to very 
fertile. The best soil is alluvial, loamy and sandy soil with good drainage.  
 
Varieties: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states.  
 
Season : Sowing is done in middle of June in Orissa. In Tamil Nadu, south -west monsoon crop is 
sown in June and north -east monsoon crop in September -October. For Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh 
and South Bihar sowing during the last week of June to first week of July is desirable to escape 
damage from shoot -fly and gall -midge.  
 
Seed rate and spacing:  The optimum spacing is 22.5 cm between plants within a row. Shallow 
sowing at a depth of 2 -3 cm is optimum for quick establishment of crop. The seed rate of 8 kg/ha 
for line sowing and 12 kg/ha for broadcasting is optimum.  
 
Manuring and fertilization: 5 tonnes of farm yard manure per hectare 2 -3 weeks before sowing. 
The fertilizer (NPK) required 20:20:0  kg /ha for Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Odisa . 40:20:0 kg 
NPK /ha is required for Tamil Nadu.  
 
 
Ready Reckoner (NFSM Cell, Crops Division), DAC&FW  
114 
 Irrigation management : First irrigation at 25 -30 DAS and second irrigation at 45 -50 (DAS).  
 
Weed Control : Two inter -cultivation and one hand weeding  in line sown crop and two hand 
weeding  in broad cost crop are necessary for effective weed control. Post -emergence application 
of 2, 4 -D sodium salt (80%) @ 1.0 k g a.i./ha at 20 -25 DAS. Isoproturon @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha as pre -
emergence spray is also effective in weeds control.  
 
Diseases and insect -pest management : Downy mildew  disease can be controlled by s praying of 
0.2% solution of Mancozeb 75 WP.  Smut disease can be  contolled by seed treatment with thiram 
or ceresan @ 2.5 g/kg of seed and soaking seeds in hot water at 55 oC for 7 -12 minutes.  For control 
of Stem borer , apply Phorate @15 kg/ha (10% granules) in the soil at the time of field 
preparation.  
 
Harvesting  and Yield : Kharif season crop -September to October and Rabi-January to February.  
With improved package of practices one can obtain 12 -15 qtl/ha of grain yield and  20 -25 qtl/ha of 
straw yield. For proper storage moisture in grain should not be more than    10-12 %.  
 
*******  
 
  